ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES









Rules & Regulations

(​For Students enrolled from July 2019 onwards​)
























Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur









1



1. ​ ​INTRODUCTION

Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the

highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge

creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities,

social sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be

able to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as

energy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific

knowledge, IIT Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness,

humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and

extra-curricular activities on campus.

The undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long

process of learning, creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes

focus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative

inquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objective

mind.



The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit

System and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly

constituted Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired

by Dean (Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics-

PG)/Associate Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).



The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a high

standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within

this broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can

include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These

academic programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate

modifications/ improvements as and when necessary.





2. ACADEMIC SESSION

The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the

next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a

summer term as per the following timelines:



Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November

Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April

Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.



Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is

at least 70.



2.1. Academic Calendar

The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic

Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping

of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,

declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the

Senate.









2



3. REGISTRATION

a. Registration: ​Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme,

on the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of

registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late

registration.



b. Provisional Registration: ​A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final

results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a

certificate from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination

of the qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the

qualifying examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be

regularized.



c. Late Registration: ​If the student does not register by the date of late registration as

mentioned in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against

deregistration may be made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. Chairman Senate

may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.



d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of

the Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.



e. Withdrawing from a Course: After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the

option of withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically within

four weeks from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. The

withdrawn course will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.



f. Cancellation of Semester Registration: Absence for a period of four or more weeks

during a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all

the courses in that semester.



g. Summer course registration: ​A department may offer summer courses to enable the

students to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during

summer provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered

on approval of the Dean.





4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION

4.1. Teaching

4.1.1. ​Medium of Instruction

The medium of instruction is English.



4.1.2. Course Structure

All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course are based on the number of contact

hours for lectures, tutorials, and practicals A student on successful completion of the course

with a passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic

maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can

consist of independent components which can be completed independently. These components

are called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all

parameters related to course numbering scheme.







3



Table 4.1​ Course Code Description

Course Code M E L 1 X X 1

Descriptions Offering Course Level of Unique Indicates Fractal

Department/IDRP  Type Courses Identification

Number

Categories See Table 4.2 See See Table This code will be 0:  Regular

Table 4.4 given centrally 1: Fractal 1

4.3 by the office of 2: Fractal 2

academics 3: Fractal 3



Note: ​Examples of course codes

Course Title L-T-P Course

Code

Regular Course Engineering Mechanics 2-1-0 MEL1XX0

Robotics 3-0-2 MEL7XX0

Fractal 1: Robot Modelling 1-0-0 MEL7XX1
Fractal Course

Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming 1-0-0 MEL7XX2

Fractal 3: Robot Control 1-0-0 MEL7XX3



Table 4.2​ Departmental Code

S. N. Type Department/Platform/Office

Department

1. ME Mechanical Engineering

2. CS Computer Science and Engineering

3. EE Electrical Engineering

4. CI Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

5. CH Chemical Engineering

6. BB Bioscience and Bioengineering

7. MT Metallurgical & Materials Engineering

8. CY Chemistry

9. MA Mathematics

10. PH Physics

11. HS Humanities and Social Science

Interdisciplinary Research Platforms (IDRPs)

12. DH Digital Humanities

13. SS Space Science and Technology

14. IO Internet of Things and Applications

15. AV Autonomous unmanned vehicles (AUV)

16. QC Quantum Information and Computation

17. CG Cognitive Science

18. SH Smart Healthcare

Others

19. OA Office of Academics

20. OS Office of Students















4



Table 4.3​ Types for Courses

S. Course Category

N. Type

1. L Lecture courses (other than lecture hours, these courses can have Tutorial and

Practical hours, e.g. L-T-P Structures 3-0-0, 3-1-2, 3-0-2, 2-0-0, etc.)

2. P Practical / Practice-based courses (where performance is evaluated primarily

on the basis of practice, practical or laboratory work with LTP structures such

as 0-0-3, 0-0-4, 1-0-3, 0-1-3, etc.)

3. D Project-based courses (e.g. Major, Minor, Mini Projects)

4. N Non-graded core component

5. T Thesis

6. Q Seminar Courses

7. S Independent Study

8. R Engineering innovation

9. E Engineering Design (Graded and Non-Graded)



Table 4.4​ Level of Courses, category and credit requirements

S. N. Level Category Credit Requirements

1. 100 Courses for B.Tech. Programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=0)

2. 200

3. 300 B.Tech. (Cr>=38)

4. 400 B.Tech. (Cr>=75)

5. 500 Preparatory​ Courses of M.Sc. and M.Tech. M.Tech. (Cr=0)

Programmes (NOT open to B.Tech. and B.Tech. + M. Sc. (Cr=0)

M.Tech. Dual Degree)

6. 600 Courses for M.Sc. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=75)

M.Sc. (Cr>=0)

M.Tech. (Cr >= 0)

7. 700 Courses for M.Tech. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=100)

Advanced courses for M.Sc. M.Sc. (Cr >=30)

M.Tech. (Cr>=0)

Ph.D. (Cr>=0)

8. 800 Advanced courses for M.Tech. and Ph.D. M.Tech. (Cr>=14)

programmes, An 800 level course should have 700 Ph.D. (Cr>=0)

level course as a pre-requisite



4.1.3  Approval of Courses

The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved

courses may be offered during any semester/summer term.



4.1.4  List of Courses

The list of courses to be offered in a Program is finalized before the beginning of the semester,

by the Department hosting that Program.



4.1.5  Categories of Courses

Courses offered can be from one of the following categories:



a) Regular course:

A regular course has 14 hours of classroom engagement per one credit. A regular course can be

under elective or core/compulsory categories.





5





Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students

registers for the course. A 700 or 800 level elective course can run with a minimum of 5

registered students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study

course as per the following section.



b) Self-study Course

A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by Senate. The main features of a

self-study course are as follows:

● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course

provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student

is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.

● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in

self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being

offered as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during

the course with prior approval of the competent authority.

● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a

Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/IRC. The final sanction of a self-study course to a

student is made by the Dean (Academics).

● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory,

design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the

course.

● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the

award of letter grade at the end of the semester.

● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.

● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.



c) Independent Study Course

Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest

under the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involving

an Instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-disciplined and having a sense

of own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. A

student having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for Independent Study courses with the

recommendation of Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study course

are as follows:

● A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study

course not exceeding 3 credits in self-study mode at most once during the program.

Such independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the

program and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript.

● Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate

recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/IRC. The final sanction of an

independent-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).

● Normally, no formal lectures will be held for an Independent Study course but

laboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral

part of the course.

● The course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. The

Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award

of letter grade at the end of the semester.



4.1.6  Conduct of Courses

Each course is conducted by the Instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors,

as needed. The Instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance





6



of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per

Subsection 5.2.



The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations

conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the Instructor(s) concerned.

The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.



A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct

contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In

direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face to face physical interaction with

the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students

to be concurrently connected to the classroom interaction via electronic conferencing involving

both audio and video communication. However, there has to be direct interaction between

faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided

study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up the study of an

approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be

also adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the

Senate, under the supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation component applicable to

courses being run through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under

direct physical supervision of a faculty. All laboratory component of a course requiring the use

of the specialized facility will be conducted through direct contact.



4.1.7  Teaching Assignments

The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the

Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are

also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in

consultation with the Head of that Department.



4.1.8  Auditing of Courses

A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the

permission of Dean (Academics) on the recommendations of Instructor of the course being

audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade

Card of the student.



4.1.9  Attendance Requirements

A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless the student takes leave of absence

for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. The

attendance records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the

student’s attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams.

Students not meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade

to pass a course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower than the

cut-off for C grade in a course.



9. 2​ ​Evaluation

The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the

classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers

and projects.



The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous

basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each

subject in each semester.





7



● Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of

a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes

duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits)

must have at least one examination.
● The total weightage of examination component (three examinations for a 14 week-long

course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.
● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.
● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom,

quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.




10. ​ ​GRADING SYSTEM

10.1. Letter Grades

At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the

Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester

with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten

regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each

course. Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in

Table 5.1. In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand

for Incomplete, Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty

member shall upload grade on the portal as per the stipulated time schedule.



Table 5.1​ Letter grade and its equivalent grade points

S.N. Letter Grade Grade Points Comment

1. A* 10 Exceptional

2. A 10 Outstanding

3. A- 9 Excellent

4. B 8 Very Good

5. B- 7 Good

6. C 6 Average

7. C- 5 Below Average

8. D 4 Marginal

9. E 2 Poor

10. F 0 Fail

11. I Incomplete

12. S Satisfactory in Course

13. X Thesis Continuation

14. U Unsatisfactory

15. W Withdrawn







A detailed description of some of the grades is given below:

S.N. Grades Description

‘A*’ grade has the same grade point as ‘A’ grade. The grade ‘A*’ indicates

exceptional performance and is awarded only in the Course/(s) in which the

1. A* number of registered students is more than 50. It should not exceed 2 % of the

total strength of the particular theory or lab course. The grade ‘A*’ is not

awarded for projects /seminars.





8



2. E ‘E’ Grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the

cutoff marks for ‘D’ Grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute.

Students who obtain an ‘E’ Grade will be eligible to appear in an additional

examination. If they perform satisfactorily, they become eligible for getting the

‘E’ grade converted to a ‘D’ Grade, otherwise, they will continue to have ‘E’

Grade. The student will have only one chance to appear for the additional

examination for an ‘E’ Grade. The additional examination will be conducted

within the first week of the next semester. The date of additional examination

of Institute core courses for undergraduate students centrally notified, while for

all other courses, the date would be announced by the respective course

coordinators. A student can appear for a maximum of three such additional

tests in a given semester. If a student cannot appear for the test due to any

reason(s), he/she will not get any additional chance. If a student with ‘E’ grade

in a course does not pass the course through the additional test, or obtains an

‘F’ grade in the course, he/she has to repeat the course if it is a core course. In

case the course is elective, the student may take the same course again or any

other course. ‘E’ and ‘F’ Grades are not counted in the calculation of the CGPA;

however, these are taken into account in the calculation of the SGPA.

3. I An ‘I’ grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his/her request to denote

incomplete performance in a course on approval of instructor. An ‘I’ grade is

awarded in case missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical

grounds or other special circumstances. Requests for ‘I’ grade should be made

at the earliest but not later than the last day of major tests. All evaluation

requirements for such students in the corresponding course(s) should be

completed before the end of the first week of the next semester. Upon

completion of all course requirements, the ‘I’ grade is converted to a regular

grade.

4. S This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded

and Audit courses. If the stipulated requirements are not fulfilled, the

unsatisfactory (U) grade is awarded. The grades obtained in an audit course

are not considered in the calculation of SGPA or CGPA.

5. X This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in thesis for

continuation

6. U This grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis,

audit or non-graded courses.

7. W This grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course.

Withdrawal from a course is permitted until the date specified in the Academics

Calendar.





5.2 Procedure for declaration of results

The following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and timeline would be as

per Academic Calendar.

1. Evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester:

2. Display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors.

3. Finalization of grades by instructors

4. Grade moderation by department/institute level committee for department/institute-wide

courses





9



5. Recommendation of grades by the Head of the Department after scrutiny of grades by a

moderation committee

6. Display of grades by Instructors

7. Grade correction, if any, within 48 hours of display of grades after approval of the head

of the department

8. Approval of Grade by the Dean (UG/PG)

9. Finalization of results by the Dean (UG/PG)

10. Approval of results by the Chairman Senate

11. Results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. In exceptional

cases, the student may appeal to the Chairman, Senate for reconsideration, with formal

justification.



5.3 Grade Point Averages

5.3.1​ ​Semester Grade Point Average

The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average of the grades earned by a

student in all the courses credited by her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the

respective semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student

in N courses registered during a semester are G​
1​, G​

2​, … G​
N​, and the corresponding credits C​

1​,

C​
2​, … C​

N​, then the SGPA is given by the following formula:





The SGPA is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and

courses in which S/X grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester.



5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average

The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall academic performance of a

student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. The CGPA is

computed similarly as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters. The CGPA is

calculated on the basis of all pass grades (A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D), except audit courses and

courses in which S/X grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters.



The SGPA and CGPA calculation are based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone.





12. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT

A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at

the end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses,

credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades)

earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.





13. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES

The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those

related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by

the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All

such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.









10



14. MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS

A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like

illness etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The

student should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor

within ten days from the date of the examination missed, explaining the reasons for their

absence. Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take

a make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a

hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of

the following categories:



● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the

Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted to the Hospital during the

period of the missed quiz/exam.
● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are

required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital

before they proceed for such consultation.
● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are

required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer

of the Institute Hospital.
● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a

medical certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly

endorsed by the parent/guardian.


A slot-wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup / supplementary

week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take

the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up examination will not normally be

given another make-up examination. However, in exceptional cases of prolonged illness

resulting in the student missing a make-up examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in

consultation with the Dean of Academics may permit the student to appear for make-up

examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. Under no

circumstances, prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance.



































11















































































12











A. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES





















































13



15. UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

IIT Jodhpur currently offers Bachelor of Technology (B. Tech.) programs, and capability linked

opportunities for undergraduate students to complete Minor/Interdisciplinary Area

Specializations or Department Area Specialization. A student can also opt for M.Tech.(dual

degree) in Departmental Area or Minor in Entrepreneurship leading to M.Tech. in

Entrepreneurship or Department Area Specialization in Engineering innovation.





16. UNDERGRADUATE ADMISSIONS

16.1. B.Tech. Programmes

16.1.1. General Admissions

Admissions to the B.Tech. Programmes are made once a year in July through the all-India level

Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) conducted by IITs. The procedures and other requirements for

admission are specified in the JEE Information Brochure brought out every year.



16.1.2. Cultural Exchange  Programmes

Admissions are also offered to foreign nationals under the Cultural Exchange Fellowship

Program of the Government of India, administered by Indian Council of Cultural Relations

(ICCR), New Delhi. Persons interested in these programs are required to apply through the

Indian High Commission/Embassy in their respective countries.



16.1.3. Change/Enhancement of Program

A student already admitted to a B.Tech. programme may switch to another department through

branch change. A student can enhance his/her programme to a Minor/Interdisciplinary Area

Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Minor/Interdisciplinary Area, Major/Department Area

Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Department Area, Minor in Entrepreneurship, Minor in

Entrepreneurship leading to M. Tech. in Entrepreneurship and Department Area Specialization in

Engineering innovation (through Industrial Translation). The rules governing these changes are

given in Section 18 (branch change) and Section 11.2 (for all others).



16.2. Reservation Policy

The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.



16.3. Student Exchange Program

Student Exchange Program provides for a one/two-semester visit by students between the two

academic institutions on a reciprocal basis. The visiting student must be a full-time student

enrolled in a degree program in their Home Institution. The exchange program is open to

full-time undergraduate and graduate students of each Home Institution. It will be executed as

per the pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU) between the institutions.



Selection of students under such program will be made by the DUGC after assessing the

preparedness of students to meet the requirements of the planned coursework/research at the

Host Institution and the relevance of the planned coursework/research to the enrolled degree

program. A visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or

may use other academic facilities as per pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU).

Under exchange program, a student of IIT Jodhpur can register at another academic institution

in India or abroad with the expectation of credit transfer up to 20 credits per semester in lieu of

the course work or research work through a pre-approved arrangement including an MoU.







14



On return, the student may apply to DUGC for waiver of credits from her/his program

requirements which s/he thinks are equivalent to the courses successfully completed at the

visited academic institution as an exchange student. With the application, the student must

submit an official transcript of the grades obtained by her/him at the visited academic

institution as an exchange student and other documents/material that the concerned DUGC may

require for evaluation. The DUGC will determine, by whatever means it deems fit, the

equivalent credits requirements for which the student may be given a waiver in her/his

programme at IIT Jodhpur. DUGC will submit its recommendations to course equivalence

committee for its approval. Moreover,



● The credits/grades indicated in the grade sheet obtained from the academic institution in

which the student has completed the courses should be used by the student as part of

his/her transcripts.

● IIT Jodhpur transcripts will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at IIT

Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) earned in other academic

institutions in a particular semester.

● The CGPA calculation based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone is to be

considered for award of prizes.

● The credits earned at the visited academic institutions will be taken into account for the

calculation of minimum required credits for the award of the degree.



16.4. Visiting Students

A visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or

university in India or abroad, and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to

complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the visiting

student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other

academic facilities.



A person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the Dean

(Academics). A visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. A visiting

student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status, Program, and

nationality.



Students so admitted also will be governed by all rules, regulations, and discipline applicable to

regular students of the Institute.



16.5. Cancellation of Admission

Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any Program shall submit copies of their mark

sheets, provisional certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the

last date specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. The Senate reserves the right to

cancel the admission of any student, who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the

specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s). Also, the Senate reserves the right to

cancel the admission at any later time, if it is found that the student had provided some false

information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission.



16.6. Fulfillment of Admission Requirements

Admission to any undergraduate Program requires that the applicant be eligible, go through the

laid-down admission procedure, and pay the prescribed fees. The Senate should formally

approve all admissions to the Undergraduate Programmes.







15



17. CURRICULUM AND ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS



17.1. Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for UG

Programmes

The total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures,

tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 11.1. Each credit is associated

with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an

average) to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the

course.



Table 11.1​ LTP-structure and credit assignment.

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond Total

contact Hours​# Credits

Contact Beyond Total (TC=TH/3)

Hours Contact Hours

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH)

1. hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 2 3 1

1. hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 2 3 1

1. hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 0.5 1.5 0.5

1. hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 2 3 1

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,

etc.



11.2 Capability Linked Opportunities for Undergraduate Students

A B.Tech. student can opt for one of the following capabilities Linked Opportunities

1) Major/Department Specialization

2) Interdisciplinary Specialization

3) Minor

4) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree



11.2.1 Eligibility Criteria for opting

(a) Major/Department Specialization, Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization

A student should have earned a minimum 100 credits with the CGPA more than or equal to 6.0

at the end on 6​th​ semester to opt for capability linked opportunity.



(b) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree in the chosen specialization

Students who have already opted for Major/Department Specialization, Minor/Interdisciplinary

Specialization can opt for dual-degree Programme from the eighth semester provided they have

earned minimum 134 Credits with at least 6 CGPA at the end of the 7th semester.



11.2.2 Minimum Credit requirements

(a) Major/Department Specialization, Interdisciplinary Specialization and Minor

A student needs to complete a total of 20 Credits in the Major/Department Specialization or

Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization area offered. 10 Credits out of 20 can be taken up as a

part of Open electives whereas the student is required to opt for an additional 10 credits in the

form of course overload. This will be indicated on the degree.



Registration for Additional Courses for Major/Department Specialization, Interdisciplinary

Specialization and Minor





16



Starting from the sixth semester, students having earned 80 credits with CGPA more than or

equal to 6.0 are permitted to take up to 4 extra Credits as part of their normal load, which

forms part of her/his additional learning component, every semester in addition to the

prescribed courses for their degree.



(b) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree in the chosen specialization

A student needs to complete a total of 56 Credits in the Minor, Department, or Interdisciplinary

area offered. It will include credits earned for Major/Department or Minor/ Interdisciplinary area

Specialization excluding the project credits.



11.3 Course Categories and Academic requirements for various

programmes

Course Categories and Academic requirements for various programmes are given in the table

below:

Table 11.2​ Course Categories and Academic requirements

S.N Course Type Course Category  B.Tech. B.Tech. Dual

.  Regular with Degree

Specialization

1. Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 34 34

Science (IS) 16 16 16

Humanities (IH) 12 12 12

2. Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 7 7

3. Programme Core (P) Programme 50 50 50

Compulsory (PC)

Programme Electives 18 18 18

(PE)

B. Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 3

4. Open (O) Electives (OE) 10 0 0

5. Specialization Compulsory (SC) 0 8 8

(Major/Minor/Department/ Elective (SE) 0 12 12#

Interdisciplinary) (S)

6. M.Tech. (M) in Minor, Compulsory (MC) 0 0 9

Department, or Electives (ME) 0 0 5

Interdisciplinary Area Project (MP) 0 0 16

Open Electives (MO) 0 0 6

Total Graded 150 160 196

7. Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 6 6

Engineering (NE) 3 3 3

Design/Practical 6 6 6

Experience (ND)

Total Graded+Non Graded  165 175 211

# Must not include any project course



11.4 Maximum Duration of the Program

The maximum duration for the completion B.Tech. Programs shall be 14 registered semesters.



11.5 Academic Performance Requirements

The minimum requirements on credits earned for continuation in a B. Tech. Programme at the

end of the second registered semester is specified in the following table:





17





Table 11.3​ Criteria for continuation at the end of the second registered semester

Description Minimum number of credits to be earned

GEN/OBC/GEN-EWS SC/ST/PD

Minimum for Continuation 18 14



If a student does not meet the criteria specified in Table 11.3, he/she may opt to restart the

programme or else their registration will be terminated. The restart will be permitted only once.

Dean (UG/PG) should propose a guideline for mentoring the student under probation. Dean of

Students should also involve in the process.

If a student chooses to restart after the first two registered semesters, then the credits earned

and semesters registered till that point will not be counted towards the graduation

requirements. The re-start will be indicated on the transcript.



11.5.1 Criteria to put a student on Academic Probation​:
●  From the third semester onward if a student fails to earn a minimum of 12 credits in

any registered semester, then he/she will be placed on academic probation.

● A student placed on probation shall be monitored, including mandatory attendance in

classes, special tutorials and mentoring. Mentoring would comprise structured guidance

under a senior student.

● If a student is on academic probation for two consecutive registered semesters, then

his/her registration will be terminated.

● If a student earns less than or equal to 15 credits in any registered semester a warning

shall be given to him/her and intimation be sent to the parents.

● The two semesters allowed for the academic probation should be counted towards the

total duration allowed for the program.



11.6 Assistantship for B.Tech. -M. Tech. Dual-degree Programmes

The students of dual-degree programmes will be considered for award of institute research/

teaching assistantship if they have earned 150 credits by the end of the eighth semester. Only

those students who have either qualified GATE or have a CGPA more than 8.0 will be eligible for

this assistantship. The assistantship will be provided for a maximum period of 14 months

beginning from the summer semester following the eighth semester, provided the student is

registered for M.Tech. Major Project in that semester. A student availing assistantship will be

required to provide 8 hours of assistance per week besides his/ her normal academic work. For

continuation of assistantship, a student will need to secure SGPA of 6.5.



A student receiving assistantship will be eligible for a total of 30 days leave during the

14-month period. He/she will not be entitled to mid-semester breaks, winter and summer

vacations.





12. UG REGISTRATION



12.1 Summer Courses

Students can register for courses during summer up to a maximum of Eight Credits on payment

of registration fee at prescribed rates. The summer term is not a regular semester and only

academically deficient students (who have low CGPA and/or fewer credits than advised by the

curriculum till that point in the programme), Major students, Minor students, and such students





18



who are short of maximum Eight Credits to complete all graduation requirements may register

during this period.



For core courses, only students with failed backlog may be considered for summer registration.

In case any vacancies are left in the courses being offered during the summer term once the

requirements of the above categories of students are fulfilled, other students may register for

these courses to fulfil some of their graduation requirements in advance.



The total number of contact hours for the courses remains the same as that during the regular

semesters, and therefore the courses run at an accelerated pace. The evaluation and grading

patterns also remain the same as during the regular semesters.



12.2 Limits on Registration



● An undergraduate student should register for a minimum of 12 credits in a semester.
● The maximum number of credits permitted for a UG student in a semester is 25.
● An undergraduate student may be permitted to register for a maximum of four credits

per semester for independent-study or self-study course


12.3 Exceptions to Regular Rules regarding Academic Load

Under-load: Students who are identified as academically deficient (on academic probation)

may register for a maximum of 16 credits.



Over-load: ​Overloading may be allowed only for students who are not on academic probation

and satisfy one of the following criteria:

● Students are allowed to overload only when they need 70 or less additional credits to

complete all the requirements of their programme.
● Beyond the second semester, any student with a CGPA of 7.5 or higher may be allowed

to overload.


12.4 Change of Registration from B. Tech. Programme to B.Tech.- M.

Tech. dual degree Programme

A B.Tech. student having opted for major/minor specialization with CGPA 6 or more at the end

of the seventh semester and fulfilling requirements mentioned earlier may be allowed to switch

to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the

eighth semester. The M.Tech degree can be any one of the approved programmes of the

institute. All requirements of M.Tech. Degree will be applicable to all such students. All such

changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.





13.  EVALUATION OF SPECIAL UG ONLY COURSES



13.1 B.Tech. Project Evaluation

● DUGC will appoint a committee for B.Tech. Project evaluation. The committee will ensure

that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project.
● DUGC will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students.







19



13.2  Composition of Department Undergraduate Committee (DUGC)

● The DUGC will be constituted of all UG Faculty Advisors and Head of Department. The

Head of Department will be the chairperson and one of the faculty advisors would be the

convenor.



13.2  Engineering Innovation

● At the completion of an Engineering Innovation Project the student will submit a report

which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project/

Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded.
● Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of

the class.


13.3 Design Project Evaluation

● At the completion of a project, the student will submit a project report which will be

evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project

and S or U grade is awarded.
● Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of

the class.


13.4 Conduct and Evaluation of B.Tech. -M. Tech Dual Degree Project

● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the

students and supervisor(s).
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth

semester.
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular

supervisor(s).
● The evaluation criterion would be the same as Section 25.



13.5  Entrepreneurship Project

● At the completion of Entrepreneurship, the student will submit a report which will be

evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by Dean (Academics-UG)/Associate Dean

(Academics-UG).
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the

Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded.




14. TERMINATION

14.1 Termination from B.Tech. Program

A student may be terminated from the B.Tech. Programme by AC, if the student

(a)  Is absent without authorized leave of absence for eight weeks or more in a semester; OR

(b)  Fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a bonafide reason; OR

(c)  Violates the code of conduct, involves in ragging, etc. as confirmed by a Committee

constituted for the purpose; OR

(d)  Does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within the maximum duration of

the program; OR

(e)  Is on academic probation for two consecutive semesters.







20



14.2 Appeal against Termination

A student, who is terminated from the B.Tech. Program can appeal to the Chairman, Senate, for

reconsideration. While making such an appeal, the student is expected to give reasons for poor

academic performance and/or why the termination should be reconsidered. The Senate shall

take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. But, the Senate will not entertain

any further appeal for review, unless substantial additional information is brought to its notice.





15. LEAVE RULES

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DUGC, and submitted

with a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior

approval of the DUGC.



15.1 Mid-Semester Recess and Vacation

Undergraduate students are entitled to avail of mid-semester recess and vacation as specified in

the Academic Calendar.



15.2 Short Leave

A student may be granted leave of absence during the semester for a maximum of 10 days on

medical grounds, and for 5 days for any other valid reason.



15.3 Semester Withdrawal

It may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period

of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.

DUGC can approve and intimate Office of Academics regarding the leave of the student for

records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the

Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards

the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student.



15.4 Academic Leave

To help students broaden their horizons and gain course/work experience, she/he may be

permitted to proceed to other academic institutes/ Industry/ R&D organization in India or

abroad. Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as

(a)  Fieldwork

(b)  Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ

(c)  Entrepreneurship initiative

(d)  Engineering innovation

(e)  Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with an academic institution in

India or abroad

(f) Internship work

All such requests must be evaluated and approved by DUGC before the leave is granted.

A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one summer term and two

semesters on academic leave.

A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 20 credits per semester as certified by

the DUGC and approved by the Course Equivalence Committee.





16. BRANCH CHANGE

(a)  An undergraduate student is eligible to apply for branch change at the end of the second

semester only, provided the student satisfies the following criteria:





21



1. Secured a CGPA, at the end of the second semester, of:

i. Greater than or equal to 7.0 for SC/ST and PD applicants

ii. Greater than or equal to 8.0 for other applicants

2. Completed all prescribed course credits for the first two semesters (including the

non-graded courses).

3. No backlog at the end of the second semester.

(b)  The student should have no disciplinary action against him/her.

(c)  Change of the branch will be permitted strictly in the order of merit as determined by

CGPA at the end of the second semester. Each available seat may be occupied by

students of any category. For students of SC/ST/PD category, concession in eligibility

criteria is given as per rule (a).

(d)  In case more than one student applying for branch change have the same CGPA, the tie

shall be resolved on the basis of JEE ranks of such applicants.

(e)  In making a change of branch, the strength of a branch should not fall below ​85% of

the sanctioned strength and should not go above ​115%​ of the sanctioned strength.

(f) The conditions mentioned in item (a) above will not be insisted upon for change to a

branch in which a vacancy exists with reference to the sanctioned strengths, and the

concerned student was eligible as per JEE Rank for admission to that branch at the time

of entry to IIT Jodhpur.

(g)  Notwithstanding any of the conditions listed above, a student with CGPA of ​9 or more at

the end of the second semester will be allowed to move to a branch of his/her choice.





17. REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATION

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she/he has met the

conditions laid down in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4.



17.1 Minimum Duration of Residence

Minimum Duration of Residence is given in the table below:



Table 17.1​ Minimum residential requirement

S.No. Program  Minimum Duration of Residence

(in semesters)

1. B. Tech. (including 6

minor/department/interdisciplinary area

specialization)

2. B. Tech. – M.Tech. 8



17.2 Academic

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned

the minimum credits as per Table 11.2 in Section 11.3 for all degrees​.


17.3 Payment of Fees and Dues

The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as

deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).



17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is

any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.





22





17.5 Completion of engagement in NCC, NSS or NSO

The student should have completed extra-curricular activity like performing arts, sports,

National Cadet Corps, National Service Schemes, and National Sports Organisation for a period

of at least two semesters during their B.Tech. Program.



17.6 Award of Degrees

17.6.1 Provisional Certificate

A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can

be provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of

Chairman, Senate. Certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or

Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable.



17.6.2 Degree Certificate

A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is

recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate

degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its

approval. The certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary

Specialization wherever applicable.





18. AMENDMENTS

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the

right to modify/amend without notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules

pertaining to its B.Tech. Programs.









23

















C. REGULATIONS FOR POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES











































24



19. POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate

programmes.

1. Master of Science (M.Sc.)

2. Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech.

3. Master of Technology (M.Tech.)

4. Dual degree:  M.Tech.-PhD.

5. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)





20. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS

The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway

during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition,

the department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis

and admit students as per the existing procedure.



20.1 Categories of Admission

A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories

i. Full-time regular

ii. Full-time sponsored

iii. Part-time

iv. External

v. Executive

However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be

offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time program).



i) Full-time Regular

In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student

supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.



ii) Full-time Sponsored

In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The candidate

is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must have two

years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.



iii) Part-time

A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attend regular classes as

per the schedule of the Institute. The student must be employed in the neighbourhood of IIT

Jodhpur. The student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at

IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a

full-time regular student.



iv) External

A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped

with the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay

in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.



v) Executive (only for M. Tech.)

A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in

1. An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR

2. Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in a maximum of 6 years.





25



3. The part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote

contact mode and limited direct interaction



20.2 Eligibility​ ​for Admission

(a) The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may

prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.

(b) The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the

Senate from time to time.

(c) Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of

Governors.



20.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)

The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the

following two avenues.

(a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by

IITs.

(b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year

program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT

Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55%

for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA

of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding

proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC

category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.



20.2.2 Admission to M Sc – M Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)

The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be

through any one of the following two avenues.

(a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by

IITs.

(b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year

program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT

Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55%

for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA

of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding

proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC

category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.



20.2.3 Admission to M Tech Program (Regular)

(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or

a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences

and Veterinary Sciences or in a related field

(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as

specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for

SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when

the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST)

on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

(c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD

circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the

written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.





26





20.2.4 Admission to MTech Program​ ​(Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)

(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or

a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and

Veterinary Science or in a related field.

(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as

specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for

SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when

the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST)

on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

(c)  The applicant must have a minimum of ​two years of work experience (after qualifying

degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to

the program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately

after the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after

registration.

(d) The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.



20.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)

(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or

a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and

Veterinary Science or in a related field

(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as

specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for

SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when

the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST)

on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

(c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD

circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the

written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.



20.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)

(a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other

academic program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee

of any organization in India or abroad.

(b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural

science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at

least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),

OR

(c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with

MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or

CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,

OR

(d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in

engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary

science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for

GEN/OBC  (65% for SC/ST).



20.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme

(QIP), Defence Personnel

The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval

of Chairman, Senate.







27



20.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals

INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time

of applying for admission.



The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and

when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The

applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and

attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category.

Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.



The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural

Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for

admission to the programme. The department's recommendation will be sent to the

Chairperson, Senate through the Chairperson, AC.



20.2.9 Admission to Ph.D (sponsored/external/part-time)

(a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other

academic program in India or abroad.

(b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural

science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at

least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),

OR

(c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with

MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or

CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,

OR

(d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in

engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary

science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for

GEN/OBC  (65% for SC/ST).

(e) The applicant must have a minimum of ​two years of work experience (after qualifying

degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to

the program.

(f) The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.



20.3  Admission of Non-Degree Students

A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or

university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to

complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the

non-degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use

other academic facilities.



Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate

satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 20.2. The application must be

routed through the office of Dean R&D.



Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.



20.4 Reservation Policy

The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.







28





21 PG REGISTRATION

21.1 Limits on Registration

Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs:

● M.Sc.: An M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10

credits in a semester.
● M.Tech.: An M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per

Table 21.1.


Table 21.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the

Regular semester/Summer Term

M.Tech. student registered under Maximum Minimum

different categories Credits Credits

Regular Semester Executive (Accelerated) 24 10

Executive (Normal) 17 10

Executive (Slow-Paced) 12 3

Executive (Part Time) 12 3

Full-time (Regular/Sponsored) 17 10

External 20 10

Part-time 12 3

Summer Term Executive (Accelerated) 16 0

Executive (Normal) 9 0

Executive (Slow-Paced) 6 0

Full-time (Regular) 9 5

Full-time (Sponsored) 9 0

External 9 0

Part-time 6 0



● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and

minimum credits that an M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree student can register are equivalent

to that of an M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.
● Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table

21.2.


Table 21.2 Maximum and Minimum Credits a Ph.D. student (Regular) can register for during

the Regular semester

Ph.D. student registered under different Maximum Credits Minimum Credits

categories

Full-time Regular 12 6

External 12 6

Part-Time 12 3



21.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)

A student admitted to an M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit

requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any

professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate

his intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The

candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status. A student can maintain RKA

status for a maximum of 6 semesters.





29







21.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D.

dual degree Programme

A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of

the second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the

end of the third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to a dual degree in the fourth

semester with the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be

required to complete his/her candidacy requirements by the end of the fifth semester.

All conditions of M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All

such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.



21.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D.

Program

A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may

be allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be

counted towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.



21.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D.

Programme

A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time

Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:

i) have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;

ii) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;

iii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the research

work.



21.5 Maximum Duration of a Program

● M.Sc.​ - 8 registered semester
● M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) ​- 12 registered semesters

which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after

completion of the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that of sponsored

candidates.
● Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14

registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive

(RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that

of sponsored candidates.
● Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.



21.5 Course Registration

Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 21.1 and

Table 4.4.



The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course

during her/his Masters or Bachelors program.















30





22 ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS



22.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG

Programmes

The total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures,

tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 22.1 and 22.2 for M.Sc. and

M.Tech. Ph.D. programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact

hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the

student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.



Table 22.1​ LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Sc.

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond Total

contact Hours​# Credits

Contact Beyond Total (TC=TH/3)

Hours Contact Hours

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH)

1. hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 2 3 1

1. hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 2 3 1

1. hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 0.5 1.5 0.5

1. hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 2 3 1

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,

etc.



Table 22.2​ LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Tech./Ph.D.

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond Total

contact Hours​# Credits

Contact Beyond Total (TC=TH/4)

Hours Contact Hours

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH)

1. hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 3 4 1

1. hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 3 4 1

1. hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 1 2 0.5

1. hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 3 4 1

1. hour of Thesis 0-0-1 1 3 4 1

(Ph.D.)

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,

etc.



22.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes

1) Compulsory Course (MC)

2) Programme Elective (ME)

3) Open Elective (MO)

4) Project works (MP)

5) Non-graded (NG)



22.3 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. Students

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Sc. students are given below in Table 22.3.







31





Table 22.3​ Programs/ Credits to be earned for MSc students

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned


MC ME MO MP Total

M.Sc. (Chemistry) 38 18 06 15 77

M.Sc. (Mathematics) 38 18 06 15 77

M.Sc. (Physics) 38 18 06 15 77



22.4 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. Students/ Executive

M.Tech.

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Tech. students are given below in Table

22.4.



Table 22.4​ Minimum Credits to be earned For MTech students

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

MC ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech (Sensors and Internet of Things) 19 17 06 16 4 62

M.Tech (Cyber Physical System) 18 18 06 16 4 62

M.Tech (Thermofluids Engineering) 17 17 06 16 4 60

M.Tech (Advanced Manufacturing 19 15 06 16 4 60

Engineering and Design)

M.Tech (Metallurgical and Materials 16 18 06 16 4 60

Engineering)

M.Tech (Artificial Intelligence) 18 18 06 16 4 62

M.Tech (Computer Science and 18 18 06 16 4 62

Engineering)

M.Tech (Bioscience and Bioengineering) 18 17 06 16 4 61

M.Tech (Data and Computational 20 15 06 16 4 61

Sciences)



22.5 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. - M.Tech. Dual Degree

Minimum credit requirements for M.Sc. - M.Tech. Dual Degree is the cumulative sum of credit

requirements for respective M.Sc. program and M.Tech. program as mentioned in Sections 22.3

and 22.4.



22.6 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree

Course categories and academic requirements for MTech - PhD dual degree students are given

below in Table 22.5.



Table 22.5​ Minimum Credits to be earned for dual degree MTech and PhD students

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

MC ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 19 17 06 16 4 62

(Sensors and Internet of Things)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Cyber 18 18 06 16 4 62

Physical System)





32



M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 17 17 06 16 4 60

(Communication and Signal

Processing)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 17 17 06 16 4 60

(Thermofluids Engineering)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 17 17 06 16 4 60

(Manufacturing Engineering)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Design 17 17 06 16 4 60

Engineering)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 16 18 06 16 4 60

(Metallurgical and Materials

Engineering)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 18 18 06 16 4 62

(Computer Science and

Engineering)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 18 18 06 16 4 62

(Artificial Intelligence)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 18 17 06 16 4 61

(Bioscience and Bioengineering)



The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during

Bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses



22.7 Academic Credit Requirements for Ph.D. Students

The minimum credits to be earned through courses is listed in Table 22.6.



Table 22.6​ Credit Requirements for PhD students

S.No. Ph.D. in  With Minimum Minimum

Credits Credits

through through Thesis

Course Work

Work

1. Engineering M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) 12 48

discipline/ in an Engineering discipline

IDRPs M.Sc. degree  in a Science discipline 30 48

D. Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) 30 48

in an Engineering discipline

2. Science, M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a 12 48

Humanities or Science, Humanities or Social

Social Science Science discipline

discipline





22.8 Academic Performance Requirements

22.8.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program

The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given in below

Table 22.7.











33



Table 22.7​ Minimum CGPA requirements

Sr. Program Continuation in For graduation

No. Programme

1. M.Sc. (only graduation Refer 22.8.2 5.0

requirement)

2. M.Tech.  5.0 5.0

3. Dual Degree (M.Sc. and 5.0 5.0

M.Tech.)

4. Dual Degree (M.Tech. and 7.0 7.0

Ph.D.)

5. Ph.D. 7.0 7.5 at the completion of

course work



22.8.2 Continuing criteria for M.Sc.

M.Sc.- ​The student must earn at least 20 credits at the end of the second semester for

continuation in the program.



22.8.3 Minimum performance for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship

The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship is given in below

Table 22.8



Table 22.8​ Minimum CGPA requirements for Continuation of Assistantship/

Fellowship

Sr. No. Program Continuation of Assistantship/

Fellowship

1. M.Tech.  6.5

2. Dual Degree (M.Tech. and Ph.D.) 7.0

3. Ph.D. 7.0





23. LEAVE RULES

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with

a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval

of the DRC.



23.1 Leave

A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid

semester break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter

term or mid-semester break.

A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch

An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch

The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC

without assistantship during that period.



23.2 Other Leaves

Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MHRD. It will not be

counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme.

Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MHRD.









34



23.3 Semester Withdrawal

May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of

four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.

In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued

for only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of

Academics regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a

semester, it can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on

the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the

programme for the student.



23.4 Academic Leave

Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as

1. Fieldwork

2. Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library

3. Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ

4. Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium

5. Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision

6. Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as

indicated in  his research proposal

7. Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with a sister institution in India or

abroad



All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is granted.

SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship during

academic leave.

● A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave.
● A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as

certified by SRC and approved by DRC.




24. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted

under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following:



24.1 M.Sc. Program

Merit-cum-Means fellowship as per Institute norms.



24.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program

A student having completed minimum credit requirements of an M.Sc. program at the end of

the second year with

(a) CGPA>=8

OR

(b) have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.



24.3 M.Tech. Program

A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A

student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.











35



24.4 Executive M Tech Program

Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the

Institute.



24.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program

Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with

regular Ph.D. students.



24.6 Ph.D. Program

A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per

the norms of IIT Jodhpur.

(a)  A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with

GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD

norms/or equivalent applicable for non-science departments.

(b) The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech or equivalent

post-bachelor's degree

(c) A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.

A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided

the student has met qualifier requirement. The enhanced fellowship will commence from the

date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing

the qualifier requirement.

The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student shall stop from the day of submission of

the Thesis.





25. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND

EVALUATION OF M. TECH./M.SC. PROJECT

● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the

students and supervisor(s).
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first

semester.
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular

supervisor(s).
● Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee

consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research

with at least one member external to the department (maybe outside the Institute also).

DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. The same committee

may examine more than one thesis. External member can be on VC. DRC will ensure

that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.
● A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer

semester following 2​nd
semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech

project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be

evaluated by his supervisor.














36



26 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PH. D. /M. TECH.-PH. D.

DUAL DEGREE PROGRAM

26.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)

26.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates

The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research.

There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of

the candidate at the time of selection.



26.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)

● Ph. D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be

assigned at the time of selection.
● Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the

students and supervisor(s).
● For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. - Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification

must be completed by the end of the first semester
● The Convener, DRC (Department Research Committee)/Coordinator (Interdisciplinary

Research Program) would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).
● There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional

supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.
● A supervisor from outside the institute, ​before the qualifier​, may be appointed on the

request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean

(Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.
● The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and

Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial

point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor.


26.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor

● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the

DRC/IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Committee) shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in

consultation with the supervisor and the student to take care of the administrative

requirements.
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an

additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor.
● The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the

supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.
● The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as a supervisor and

will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared qualifier

before the supervisor’s retirement/resignation.


26.1.4 ​Composition of ​Departmental ​Research Committee (DRC)

The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs

of the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed

by the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by Professor/Associate Professor nominated by Head of

the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The

DRC has to be approved by Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the convenor

of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years.







37



26.1.5 ​Composition of  Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC)

The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the

chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a

member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure

for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics).



26.2 Change of Research Supervisor

Change of supervisor (s), under exceptional circumstances, shall be permitted by Dean

(Academics) on the recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of (i) the

student (ii) the present supervisor (s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s). If required,

realignment of student’s research program will happen under the supervision of the DRC/IRC.



26.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)

26.3.1 Composition of SRC

● The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members

conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the

department (maybe outside the Institute also).
● A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the

supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by Dean (Academics).
● The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and

the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean

(Academics).
● The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
● Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through the

DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record.
● Chairman and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the

thesis.
● The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the

completion of the program.


26.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)

The academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the

SRC and peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii)

A Poster Presentation open to all. SRC will award a Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based

upon (i) and (ii). Two consecutive Non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of

registration.

For implementational convenience, academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for

conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following the groupings of students

and scheduling guidelines are suggested

1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: During 1st July to 30th September of the

year.

2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: During 1st December to 28th February of the

year.

The first APM will be conducted after the successful completion of qualifier requirements.

Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be reported by the

supervisor(s) through the SRC for record.

Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and

approved by Dean (academics)





38





26.5​ ​Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student

The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a

Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.

1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 22.8.1

2. Cleared comprehensive examination

3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research

4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal



The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements

before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and

in any case ​not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in

the Ph. D. program. Part-time candidates will need to complete the qualifier requirement before

the beginning of the seventh semester.



26.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student

● The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the

student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the

field of research.
● The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination

Committee of the Department/IDRP.
● The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.
● Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting a comprehensive examination.

Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. The

course content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and the

Senate. The syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same

as courses offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the

knowledge in that area.
● The SRC will specify a set three papers as a comprehensive requirement for a particular

student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.
● The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student

within ​two weeks​ of SRC formation.
● All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can

coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may

decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.
● A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed

the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.
● If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the

first attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear

within six months of the first attempt.
● For clearing of the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in

all papers.


Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:

● Ph.D. : within 3 semesters
● Direct Ph.D. and MTech - PhD  Dual Degree: within 5 semesters



26.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)

Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State

of Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the





39



area. The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory

grade in SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal.



26.5.3 Research Proposal

Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion

of SOTA. The research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to

research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the

candidate.



26.6. Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree

A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D.

degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such

students who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis.







26.7 Relaxation in  M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program

● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier

requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also

convert into part-time/external Ph.D. student and exit with M.Tech degree if all

conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.
● The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if

SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends the continuance of

registration.




26.8 Cancellation of Registration

● The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC

or who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.
● The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the

maximum permissible period specified in Section 21.5 will be liable for cancellation.




26.9 Synopsis

● Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal closed-door

assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC.
● The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied with the quality and

quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.
● Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis

report.
● Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within ​six months of the open seminar

date. If required, an extension of ​three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics)

on the recommendation of SRC.
● If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be

asked to present the synopsis again.
● On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in

4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis,

the student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in

the required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for

consideration of the SRC.





40



● The student should have at least one paper either published or accepted for publication

in a refereed journal/refereed conference (SRC members are required to certify the

quality of journals/conference).


26.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation

The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty

Members from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in

which the student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, the following guidelines

should be followed

● The examiners shall have at least 6 years of Post-Ph.D. experience;
● No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and
● The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.
● Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners​.
● The Chairman, Senate, shall select ​minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of

which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these

examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. ​In addition, SRC and

Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.
● The Viva Voce will be conducted in the presence of SRC, supervisor(s) and the

external examiner.
● One of the external examiners shall attend the Thesis Defense.
● The examiners shall submit a written report on the thesis within a period of two months

from the date of receipt of the Thesis.
● If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean

(Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.
● If any of the examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean

(Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration.

The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special

circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.

program.
● If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be

awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the

Ph.D. program.
● If an examiner suggests a revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis

after the revision within a prescribed time period of ​6 months in ​consultation with the

Supervisor(s).
● When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the

Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the

suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the

Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.
● The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within

India and other Faculty Members (quorum would be Chairman, SRC, Supervisor(s) and

an external examiner), who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the

student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their

recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to Senate, to consider the award

of Ph.D. degree to the student.




27. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she/he has met the

requirements laid down in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4 below.







41



27.1 Minimum Residential Requirement

Table 27.1​ Minimum residential requirement

S.No. Program  Qualifications at the time of joining the Minimum Duration

Program (in semesters) of

Residence

1. M.Sc.  All qualifying degrees 4

2. M.Sc.-M.Tech. All qualifying degrees 7

Dual Degree

3. M.Tech. Programs

Full-time All qualifying degrees 3

Regular

/Sponsored

Part-time All qualifying degrees 0

Executive All qualifying degrees 1

4. Ph. D. Programs

Full-time Regular

Engineering M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an 2

discipline  Engineering discipline

M.Sc. degree  in a Science discipline 5

E. Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering)  in an 5

Engineering discipline

Science, M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a Science, 2

Humanities or Humanities or Social Science discipline

Social Science

discipline

Part-time All qualifying degrees 0

External All qualifying degrees 1



27.2 Academic

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned

the minimum credits as per Section 22.3 for M. Sc., Section 22.4 for M. Tech., Section 22.5 for

M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 22.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 22.7 for

Ph.D., while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 22.09.







27.3 No Dues Clearance

Degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as

deemed necessary by Dean (Academics)



27.4 No case of Disciplinary Action

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is

any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.















42



27.5 Award of Degrees

27.5.1 Provisional Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, can

be provided with a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of

Chairman, Senate.



27.5.2 Degree Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, is

recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate

degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its

approval.





28. AMENDMENTS

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the

right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes

at IIT-Jodhpur.











43
ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES

Rules & Regulations
(For Students enrolled from July 2022 onwards)

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur



1. INTRODUCTION
Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the
highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge
creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, social
sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able
to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as energy,
food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific knowledge, IIT
Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and
team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on
campus.
The academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning,
creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing
deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability
to address and solve new problems with free and objective mind. 
The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit System
and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted
Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired by Dean
(Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics- PG)/Associate
Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).
The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure high standard
of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within this
broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can include
additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These academic
programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate modifications/
improvements as and when necessary.

2. ACADEMIC SESSION
The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the
next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer
term as per the following timelines: 

Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November 
Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April 
Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July. 



Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at
least 70. 

2.1. Academic Calendar
The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic
Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of
courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,
declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the
Senate.

3. REGISTRATION
a. Registration: Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on
the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of
registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late
registration. 

b. Provisional Registration: A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final results
of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate
from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the
qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying
examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be
regularized.

c. Late Registration: If the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned
in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against deregistration may be
made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. The Chairman Senate may permit the
continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine. 

d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of the
Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.



e. Withdrawing from a Course:  After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the option of
withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically within four weeks
from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. The withdrawn course
will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.

f. Cancellation of Semester Registration:  Absence for a period of four or more weeks during a
semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all the
courses in that semester.

g. Summer course registration:  A department may offer summer courses to enable the students
to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during summer
provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered on
approval of the Dean/ Associate Dean.

4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION
4.1.  Teaching
4.1.1.  Medium of Instruction 
The medium of instruction is English.
4.1.2. Course Structure
All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course is based on the number of contact hours
for lectures, tutorials, and practicals. A student on successful completion of the course with a
passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic
maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can consist
of independent components which can be completed independently. These components are
called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all parameters
related to the course numbering scheme.
Table 4.1 Course Code Description
Course Code M E L 1 X X 1
Descriptions Offering Course Level of Unique Identification Indicates

Department/IDRP  Type Courses Number Fractal

Categories See Table 4.2 See See Table This code will be given 0:  Regular
Table 4.3 4.4 centrally by the office of 1: Fractal 1

academics 2: Fractal 2
3: Fractal 3

Note: Examples of course codes 



Course Title L-T-P Course Code

Regular Course Engineering Mechanics 2-1-0 MEL1XX0
Robotics 3-0-2 MEL7XX0
Fractal 1: Robot Modelling 1-0-0 MEL7XX1

Fractal Course
Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming 1-0-0 MEL7XX2
Fractal 3: Robot Control 1-0-0 MEL7XX3

Table 4.2 Departmental Code
S. N. Type Department/Platform/Office
Department

1. ME Mechanical Engineering
2. CS Computer Science and Engineering
3. EE Electrical Engineering 
4. CI Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
5. CH Chemical Engineering 
6. BB Bioscience and Bioengineering
7. MT Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
8. CY Chemistry
9. MA Mathematics
10. PH Physics
11. HS Humanities and Social Science

Interdisciplinary Research Platforms (IDRPs)
12. DH Digital Humanities 
13. SS Space Science and Technology
14. IO Internet of Things and Applications
15. RM Robotics and Mobility Systems
16. QC Quantum Information and Computation
17. SH Smart Healthcare

Schools
18. MS School of Management & Entrepreneurship 
19. AI School of Artificial Intelligence & Data Science
20. SL School of Liberal Arts

Others
21. OA Office of Academics 
22. OS Office of Students

Table 4.3 Types for Courses
S. Course Category
N. Type
1. L Lecture courses (other than lecture hours, these courses can have Tutorial and Practical

hours, e.g. L-T-P Structures 3-0-0, 3-1-2, 3-0-2, 2-0-0, etc.)
2. P Practical / Practice based courses (where performance is evaluated primarily on the basis

of practice, practical or laboratory work with LTP structures such as 0-0-3, 0-0-4, 1-0-3,
0-1-3, etc.)

3. D Project based courses (e.g. Major, Minor, Mini Projects)
4. N Non-graded core component 
5. T Thesis
6. Q Seminar Courses
7. S Independent Study
8. R Product Realization
9. E Engineering Design (Graded and Non-Graded)



Table 4.4 Level of Courses, category and credit requirements
S. Level Category Credit Requirements
N.
1. 100 Courses for B.Tech. Programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=0)
2. 200
3. 300 B.Tech. (Cr>=38)
4. 400 B.Tech. (Cr>=75)
5. 500 Preparatory Courses of M.Sc. and M.Tech.  Programmes (NOT M.Tech. (Cr=0)

open to B.Tech. and B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree) M. Sc. (Cr=0)
6. 600 Courses for M.Sc. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=75)

M.Sc. (Cr>=0)
M.Tech. (Cr >= 0)

7. 700 Courses for M.Tech. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=85 with
CGPA>=6*)

Advanced courses for M.Sc. M.Sc. (Cr >=30)
M.Tech. (Cr>=0)
Ph.D. (Cr>=0)

8. 800 Advanced courses for M.Tech. and Ph.D. programmes, An 800 level M.Tech. (Cr>=14) 
course should have 700 level course as a pre-requisite Ph.D. (Cr>=0)

4.1.3 Approval of Courses
The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved
courses may be offered during any semester/summer term.

4.1.4 List of Courses
The list of courses to be offered in a Program is finalized before the beginning of the semester, by
the Department hosting that Program.

4.1.5 Categories of Courses
Courses offered can be from one of the following categories: 

a) Regular course:
A regular course has 14 hours of classroom engagement per credit. A regular course can be under
elective or core/compulsory categories. 
Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students
register for the course. A 700 or 800 level elective course can run with a minimum of 5 registered
students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study course as per
the following section. 



b) Self-study Course
A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by the Senate. The main features of a
self-study course are as follows:

● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course
provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student
is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority. 

● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in
self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered
as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course
with prior approval of the competent authority.

● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a
Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program committee. The final
sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).

● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.

● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the
award of letter grade at the end of the semester.

● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.
● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.

c) Independent Study Course
Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest
under the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involving
an instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-discipline and having a sense of
own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. A
student having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for Independent Study courses with the
recommendation of the Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study
course are as follows:

● A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study
course not exceeding 3 credits in self-study mode at most once during the program. Such
an independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the
program and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript.



● Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate
recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program
committee. The final sanction of an independent-study course to a student is made by the
Dean (Academics).

● Normally, no formal lectures will be held for an independent study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.

● The course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. The
Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award
of letter grade at the end of the semester.

4.1.6 Conduct of Courses
Each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors,
as needed. The instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance
of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per
Subsection 5.2.

The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations
conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the instructor(s) concerned.
The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.

A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct
contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In
direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face-to-face physical interaction with
the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students
to be concurrently connected to the class-room interaction via electronic conferencing involving
both audio and video communication.  However, there has to be direct interaction between
faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided
study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up study of an
approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be also
adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the senate,
under supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation components applicable to courses being run
through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical



supervision of a faculty. All laboratory components of a course requiring use of a specialized
facility will be conducted through direct contact.

4.1.7 Teaching Assignments
The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the
Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are
also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in
consultation with the Head of that Department.
4.1.8 Auditing of Courses
A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the
permission of Dean (Academics) on the recommendations of the Instructor of the course being
audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade
Card of the student. 

4.1.9 Attendance Requirements
A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless the student takes leave of absence
for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. The attendance
records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the student’s
attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. Students not
meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade to pass a
course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower than the cut-off for C
grade in a course.

4.2 Evaluation
The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the
classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers and
projects.

The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous
basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each
subject in each semester.

● Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of
a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes



duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits)
must have at least one examination.

● The total weightage of the examination component (three examinations for a 14-week
long course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure. 

● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class. 
● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom,

quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects. 

9. GRADING SYSTEM
9.1. Letter Grades
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the
Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten
regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each course.
Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in Table 5.1.
In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand for Incomplete,
Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty member shall
upload grades on the portal as per stipulated time schedule. 

Table 5.1 Letter grade and its equivalent grade points

S.N. Letter Grade Grade Points Comment

1. A* 10 Exceptional
2. A 10 Outstanding
3. A- 9 Excellent
4. B 8 Very Good
5. B- 7 Good
6. C 6 Average
7. C- 5 Below Average
8. D 4 Marginal
9. E 2 Poor
10. F 0 Fail
11. I Incomplete
12. S Satisfactory in Course
13. X Thesis Continuation
14. U Unsatisfactory
15. W Withdrawn



A detailed description of some of the grades is given below:

S.N. Grades Description

‘A*’ grade has the same grade point as ‘A’ grade.  The grade ‘A*’ indicates exceptional
1. A* performance and is awarded only in the Course/(s) in which the number of registered

students is more than 50. It should not exceed 2 % of the total strength of the particular
theory or lab course. The grade ‘A*’ is not awarded for projects /seminars.

2. E ‘E’ Grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the cutoff marks for
‘D’ Grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute. Students who obtain an ‘E’
Grade will be eligible to appear in an additional examination. If they perform satisfactorily,
they become eligible for getting the ‘E’ grade converted to a ‘D’ Grade, otherwise, they will
continue to have ‘E’ Grade. The student will have only one chance to appear for the
additional examination for an ‘E’ Grade. The additional examination will be conducted
within the first week of the next semester. The date of additional examination of Institute
core courses for undergraduate students will be centrally notified, while for all other
courses, the date would be announced by the respective course coordinators. A student
can appear for a maximum of three such additional tests in a given semester. If a student
cannot appear for the test due to any reason(s), he/she will not get any additional chance.
If a student with ‘E’ grade in a course does not pass the course through the additional test,
or obtains an ‘F’ grade in the course, he/she has to repeat the course if it is a core course.
In case the course is an elective, the student may take the same course again or any other
course. ‘E’ and ‘F’ Grades are not counted in the calculation of the CGPA; however, these
are taken into account in the calculation of the SGPA.

3. I An ‘I’ grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his/her request to denote incomplete
performance in a course on approval of an instructor. An ‘I’ grade is awarded in case of
missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical grounds or other special
circumstances. Requests for ‘I’ grade should be made at the earliest but not later than the
last day of major tests. All evaluation requirements for such students in the corresponding
course(s) should be completed on or before the last date of add and drop of courses
specified in the academic calendar. Upon completion of all course requirements, the ‘I’
grade is converted to a regular grade.

4. S This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded and Audit
courses or in a thesis after successful completion of the open seminar. The grades
obtained in an audit course are not considered in the calculation of SGPA or CGPA.

5. X This grade is awarded to a student in a course for continuation.

6. U This grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis, audit or
non-graded courses.

7. W This grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course. Withdrawal
from a course is permitted until the date specified in the Academics Calendar.

5.2 Procedure for declaration of results 
The following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and time line would be as
per Academic Calendar. 

1. Evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester 
2. Display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors
3. Finalization of grades by Instructors 
4. Grade moderation by department/institute level committee for department/institute

wide courses 



5. Recommendation of grades by the Head of the Department after scrutiny of grades by a
department moderation committee

6. Display of grades by Instructors
7. Grade correction, if any, within 48 hours of display of grades after approval of the head of

the department
8. Approval of Grade by the Dean (UG/PG)/Associate Dean(UG/PGs)
9. Finalization of results by the Dean (UG/PG)/Associate Dean(UG/PG)

10. Approval of results by the Chairman Senate
11. Results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. In exceptional cases,

an appeal may be made to the Chairman, Senate for reconsideration, with formal
justification.

5.3 Grade Point Averages
5.3.1 Semester Grade Point Average
The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average of the grades earned by a
student in all courses credited by her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the
respective semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student in
N courses registered during a semester are G1, G2, … GN, and the corresponding credits C1, C2, …
CN, then the SGPA is given by the following formula: 

The SGPA is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and
courses in which S/X grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester.

5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average
The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall academic performance of a
student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. The CGPA is computed
similarly as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters. The CGPA is calculated on the
basis of all pass grades (A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D), except audit courses and courses in which S/X
grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters.
The SGPA and CGPA calculation is based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone. 



12. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT
A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at the
end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses,
credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades)
earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.

13. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES
The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those
related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by
the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All
such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.

14. MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS
A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness
etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The student
should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor within ten
days from the date of the missed examination, explaining the reasons for their absence.
Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take a
make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a
hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the
following categories:

● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the
Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted in the Hospital during the period
of the missed quiz/exam. 

● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital
before they proceed for such consultation. 

● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer
of the Institute Hospital. 

● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a medical
certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly
endorsed by the parent/guardian.



A slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup /
supplementary week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those
who are permitted to take the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up
examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. However, in
exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up
examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in consultation with the Dean of Academics
may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the
first week of the next semester. Under no circumstances prorating can be done for the
missed examinations or attendance.



REGULATIONS FOR PG PROGRAMME



15. POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate
programmes.

1. Master of Science (M.Sc.) 
2. Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech.
3. Master of Technology (M.Tech.) 
4. Dual degree:  M.Tech.-PhD. 
5. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)

10. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS
The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway
during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition, the
department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis and
admit students as per the existing procedure.

10.1Categories of Admission
A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories
i. Full-time regular
ii. Full-time sponsored
iii. Part-time 
iv. External
v. Part-time (online)
vi. Part-time (Project sponsored)
vii. Executive
However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be
offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time programs).

i) Full-time Regular
An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student
supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.

ii) Full-time Sponsored 
An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The
candidate is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must
have two years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.

iii) Part-time
A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attends regular classes as per
schedule of the Institute. The student must produce an NOC from the employer for pursuing the
programme at IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as
compared to a full-time regular student. 



iv) External 
A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped with
the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay in the
campus to complete the minimum residency requirements. 

v) Part-time (online)
A part-time (online) student is a working professional who, while employed, attends classes in a
synchronous audio-visual mode as per the schedule of the Institute including limited contact
sessions. The student is expected to register for a limited number of credits per semester. The
student will need to spend at least 12 months in the campus before submission of the Ph.D thesis
distributed over the entire period of the programme as per the academic requirements. The
student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at IIT Jodhpur
certifying that the employer will also provide access to resources for proper execution of the
research work.

vi) Part-time (Project sponsored)
A part-time candidate is a project student receiving fellowship at least at the MoE stipulated rate
being supported through research projects running in the institute. The student can register only for
a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student. The student is expected to
receive the fellowship for a minimum of 36 months. The student will be paying fees at the same rate
as that of full time GATE Qualified candidates. The Department will process the applications ONLY if
such a position is available in the respective M. Tech. program.

vii) Executive (only for M. Tech.)
A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in 

1. An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR 
2. Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in maximum of 6 years.
3. Part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote contact

mode and limited direct interaction

10.2 Eligibility for Admission 
a. The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may
prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.
a. The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the
Senate from time to time.
b. Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of
Governors.

10.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)
The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the
following two avenues.

a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by
IITs.

b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3 or 4 year program)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.



The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC  (55% for
SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0
for GEN/OBC  (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first class as specified by the university/institute.

10.2.2 Admission to M.Sc – M.Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)
The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be
through any one of the following two avenues.

a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by
IITs.

b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3 or 4 year program)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC  (55% for
SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0
for GEN/OBC  (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first class as specified by the university/institute.

10.2.3 Admission to M.Tech Program (Regular) 
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a

master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and
Veterinary Sciences or in related field

b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC  (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC  (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first
class as specified by the university/institute.

c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

10.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a

master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in related fields.

b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC  (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first
class as specified by the university/institute.

c) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after
the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after registration.

d) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.



10.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a

master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in related field

b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC  (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC  (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first
class as specified by the university/institute.

c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

10.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)
a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic

program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any
organization in India or abroad. 

b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST), 

OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with

MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,

OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering

or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC  (65% for
SC/ST) .

10.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme (QIP),
Defence Personnel  
The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval
of Chairman, Senate. 

10.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals  
INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of
applying for admission. 

The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and
when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The
applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and
attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category.
Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.



The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural
Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for
admission to the programme. The department's recommendation will be sent to the Chairperson,
Senate through the Chairperson, AC.  

10.2.9 Admission to Ph.D. (sponsored/external/part-time)
a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic

program in India or abroad.  
b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,

science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST), 

OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with

MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,

OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering

or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC  (65% for
SC/ST) .

e) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program. 

f) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

10.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students  
A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to
complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-degree
student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other
academic facilities. 

Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate
satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 10.2. The application must be routed
through the office of Dean R&D. A casual student can register up to a maximum of 9 credits in a
semester. On successful completion of the course, students will be awarded with a Course
Completion Certificate and Grade obtained. A casual student can also accumulate credits to
petition for a certificate or a diploma from IIT Jodhpur.

Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute. 
10.4 Reservation Policy
The reservation policy of the Government of India will be followed.



11. PG REGISTRATION 
11.1 Limits on Registration 
Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs: 

● M.Sc.:  A M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10
credits in a semester. 

● M.Tech.: A M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table
11.1. 

Table 11.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits a M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular
semester/Summer Term :

M.Tech. student registered under different Indicative Maximum Minimum
categories Credits Credits

Regular Executive (Accelerated) 24 10
Semester Executive (Normal) 17 10

Executive (Slow-Paced) 12 3
Executive (Part Time) 12 3
Full-time (Regular/Sponsored) 17 10
External 20 10
Part-time 12 3

Summer Term Executive (Accelerated) 16 0
Executive (Normal) 9 0
Executive (Slow-Paced) 6 0
Full-time (Regular) 9 5
Full-time (Sponsored) 9 0
External 9 0
Part-time 6 0

● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and
minimum credits that a M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/direct Ph.D. student can register are
equivalent to that of a M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student. 

● Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 11.2. 

Table 11.2 Maximum and Minimum Credits a Ph.D. student can register for during the Regular
semester 
Ph.D. student registered under different Indicative Indicative Minimum
categories  Maximum Credits Maximum Credits Credits

(before qualifier) (after qualifier)
Full-time Regular 16 16 6
External 16 12 6
Part-Time 12 12 3

11.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)
A student admitted to a M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any
professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his
intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean (academic). The
candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status.



11.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. (Regular) Programme to M.Tech. (Part-time)
Programme 
A full-time regular M.Tech. student may be allowed to change the registration to the part-time
M.Tech. programme after successful completion of third semester. A student requesting such a
conversion must:

i) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC; and
ii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work

11.3 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree
Programme 
A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of
second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the end of
third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to dual degree in the fourth semester with
the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be required to complete
his/her candidacy requirements by the end of fifth semester. 
All conditions of the M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All
such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate. 

11.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. Program
A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may be
allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be counted
towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements. 

11.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. Programme  
 A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time
Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:  

i) have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;
ii) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC; 
iii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work.  

11.5 Maximum Duration of a Program
● M.Sc. - 8 registered semester
● M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) - 12  registered semesters which

may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of
the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as that of sponsored candidates. 

● Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14 
registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive
(RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as
that of sponsored candidates. 

● Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC. 



11.6 Course Registration
Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 11.1 and
Table 4.4.

The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during
her/his Masters or Bachelors program.

12. ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS
12.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programmes
The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial,
and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 12.1 and 12.2 for M.Sc. and M.Tech. Ph.D.
programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the
expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each
contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

Table 12.1 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Sc.
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours# Total Credits (TC=TH/3)

Contact Hours (CH) Beyond Contact Total
Hours (BCH) Hours

(TH)
1. hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 2 3 1
1. hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 2 3 1
1. hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 0.5 1.5 0.5
1. hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 2 3 1
#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,
etc.

Table 12.2 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Tech./Ph.D.
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact Total Credits

Hours# (TC=TH/4)
Contact Hours (CH) Beyond Contact Total

Hours (BCH) Hours
(TH)

1. hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 3 4 1
1. hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 3 4 1
1. hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 1 2 0.5
1. hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 3 4 1
1. hour of Thesis 0-0-1 1 3 4 1
(Ph.D.)
#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,
etc.

12.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes
1) Compulsory Course (MC)
2) Programme Compulsory (PC)
3) Programme Elective (ME)
4) Open Elective (MO/OE)
5) Specialization Core (SC)
6) Specialization Elective (SE)
7) Specialization Stream Electives (SSE)
8) Micro Specialization Core (MSC)
9) Project works (MP)
10) Non-graded (NG)



12.3 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. Students
Course categories and academic requirements for M.Sc. students are given below in Table 12.3.

Table 12.3 Programs/ Credits to be earned for MSc students
Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

MC ME MO MP Total
M.Sc. (Chemistry) 38 18 06 15 77
M.Sc. (Mathematics) 38 18 06 15 77
M.Sc. (Physics) 38 18 06 15 77
M.Sc. (Digital Humanities) 37 18 06 15 76

Program Minimum Credits to be earned
PC SE/SC OE MP Total

M.Sc. (Computational Social Science) 37 18 6 15 76

12.4 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. Students/ Executive M.Tech.
Course categories and academic requirements for M.Tech. students are given below in Table 12.4.

Table 12.4 Minimum Credits to be earned For MTech students
Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

MC ME MO MP NG Total
M.Tech (Sensors and Internet of Things) 19 17 06 16 4 62
M.Tech (Cyber Physical System) 18 18 06 16 4 62
M.Tech (Thermofluids Engineering) 17 17 06 16 4 60
M.Tech (Advanced Manufacturing and Design) 19 15 06 16 4 60
M.Tech (Materials Engineering) 16 18 06 16 4 60
M.Tech (Artificial Intelligence) 18 18 06 16 4 62
M.Tech (Computer Science and Engineering) 18 18 06 16 4 62
M.Tech (Bioscience and Bioengineering) 18 17 06 16 4 61
M.Tech (Data and Computational Sciences) 20 15 06 16 4 61
M.Tech (Intelligent Communication Systems) 20 16 6 16 4 62
M.Tech (Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality) 19 15 6 16 4 60
M.Tech (Chemical Engineering) 17 17 6 16 4 60
M.Tech (Intelligent VLSI Systems) 20 16 6 16 4 62

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned
PC SSE ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech (Infrastructure Engineering with Specialization in 3 17 17 3 16 4 60
Environmental Engineering)
M.Tech (Civil and Infrastructure Engineering with Major in 3 17 17 3 16 4 60
Energy)

Program Minimum Credits to be earned
MC MSC ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech (Robotics and Mobility Systems) 18 9 7 6 16 4 60

12.5 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. - M.Tech. Dual Degree
Minimum credit requirements for M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree is cumulative sum of credit
requirements for respective M.Sc. program and M.Tech. program as mentioned in Sections 12.3
and 12.4.



12.6 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree
Course categories and academic requirements for MTech - PhD dual degree students are given
below in Table 12.5.

Table 12.5 Minimum Credits to be earned for dual degree MTech and PhD students
Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

MC ME MO MP NG Total
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Sensors and Internet of Things) 19 17 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Cyber Physical System) 18 18 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Communication and Signal Processing) 17 17 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Thermofluids Engineering) 17 17 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Materials Engineering) 16 18 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Computer Science and Engineering) 18 18 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Artificial Intelligence) 18 18 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Bioscience and Bioengineering) 18 17 03 20 4 62
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Intelligent Communication Systems) 20 16 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Advanced Manufacturing) 19 15 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Mechanical Design) 19 15 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Data and Computational Sciences) 20 15 03 20 4 62
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Chemical Engineering) 17 17 03 20 4 61

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned
PC SSE ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Infrastructure Engineering 3 17 17 03 20 4 64
with Specialization in Environmental Engineering)
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Civil and Infrastructure 3 17 17 03 20 4 64
Engineering with Major in Energy)
The DRC/IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during
Bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses.

12.7 Academic Credit Requirements for Ph.D. Students

The minimum credits to be earned through courses, is listed in Table 12.6.

Table 12.6 Credit Requirements for PhD students
S.No. Ph.D. in With Minimum Credits Minimum Credits

through Course through Thesis
Work Work

1. Engineering M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. 12 48
discipline (Engineering) in an Engineering

discipline
M.Sc. degree in a Science 24 48
discipline
B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. 24 48
(Engineering) in an Engineering
discipline

2. Science, Humanities M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in 12 48
or Social Science a Science, Humanities or Social
discipline Science discipline



The indicative maximum credits, a student registers in a semester, are notional. In addition to the
above minimum credit requirements through coursework, Ph. D. students are further required to
complete four compulsory non-graded (NG) courses before the open seminar. A student already
completed a NG course as part of his/her program need not register for the same course again.

The coursework requirements for IDRP Ph.D. students will be in line with Table 12.6.

While securing the minimum overall CGPA requirement in 12 (Ph.D. in departmental domains)/ 24
(Ph.D. in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline/direct Ph.D.) earned credits, a
course repeat process may be allowed for a maximum of 4 credits for Ph.D. students in
departmental domains and 8 credits for Ph.D. students in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a
Science discipline or for students enrolled in direct Ph.D. programme. The student can repeat
course(s) within the said credit limit in which he has obtained a pass grade but performance is
poor (secured grade is B- or lower). No replacement of course(s) in which the student has
secured pass grade and above is allowed. If the student opts to repeat a course, then the grade
secured in the next attempt will prevail.

12.8 Academic Performance Requirements
12.8.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given
below in Table 12.7.

Table 12.7 Minimum CGPA requirements 
Sr. Program Continuation in Programme For graduation
No. (SGPA)
1. M.Sc. (only graduation Refer 12.8.2 5.0

requirement)
2. M.Tech.  5.0 5.0
3. Dual Degree (M.Sc. and 5.0 5.0

M.Tech.)
4. Dual Degree (M.Tech. and 6.5 (For first semester >=6) 7.0

Ph.D.)
5. Ph.D. 6.5 (For first semester >=6) 7.5 at completion of course

work

12.8.2 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for Ph.D. students

A PhD student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA
less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average
(DGPA) where DGPA is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum
number of credits.

12.8.3 Continuing criteria for M.Sc. 
M.Sc.- The student must earn at least 20 credits at the end of second semester for continuation in
the program. 



12.8.4 Minimum performance for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship is given in below
Table 12.8

Table 12.8 Minimum CGPA requirements for Continuation of Assistantship/Fellowship
Sr. No. Program Continuation of Assistantship/

Fellowship
1. M.Tech.  6.0
2. Dual Degree (M.Tech. and Ph.D.) 6.5
3. Ph.D. 6.5

13. LEAVE RULES
Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with a
medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of
the DRC.

13.1 Leave
A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid semester
break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter term or
mid-semester break.
A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch 
An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch
The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC
without assistantship during that period. 

13.2 Other Leaves
Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MoE. It will not be
counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme.
Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MoE. 

13.3 Semester Withdrawal 
May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of
four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.
In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for
only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of Academics
regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it
can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on medical
ground will not be counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme for the
student.

13.4 Academic Leave 
Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as

1. Field work 
2. Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library
3. Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
4. Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium 



5. Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision
6. Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme  as

indicated in  his research proposal
7. Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with sister institution in India or

abroad

All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is
granted. SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship
during academic leave.

● A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave.
● A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as

certified by SRC and approved by DRC.

14. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted

under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following:

14.1 M.Sc. Program
Merit-cum-Means fellowship as per Institute norms. 

14.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program 
A student having completed minimum credit requirements of a M.Sc. program at the end of
second year with 
a. CGPA>=8 

OR

b. have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.

14.3 M.Tech. Program
A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A
student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines. 

14.4 Executive M Tech Program  
Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the
Institute.

14.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program  
Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with
regular Ph.D. students. 

14.6 Ph.D. Program
A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the
norms of IIT Jodhpur. 
a. A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with
GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD norms.
b. The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech. or equivalent
post-Bachelor’s degree



c. A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided
the student has met the qualifier requirement. Enhanced fellowship will commence from the
date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing
the qualifier requirement. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the above
requirements.
The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student will continue till thesis Defense or end of
the semester in which he/she has submitted thesis, whichever is earlier. The above is permissible
subject to assistantship/fellowship available in the semester under question as per
MHRD/CSIR/DST/UGC rule.

15. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND EVALUATION OF
M.TECH./M.SC. PROJECT 

● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).

● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first
semester.

● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to regular
supervisor(s). 

● Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee
consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research
with at least one-member external to the department (may be outside the Institute also).
DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. Same committee may
examine more than one thesis. The external member can be on VC. DRC will ensure that
the Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy. 

● A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer
semester following 2nd semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech
project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be
evaluated by his supervisor.

16. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PH. D. /M. TECH.-PH. D. DUAL DEGREE
PROGRAM

16.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)
16.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates
The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research.
There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the
candidate at the time of selection.

16.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)
● Ph. D.   students   shall   be   admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be

assigned at the time of selection. 
● Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the

students and supervisor(s).



● For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. - Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification
must be completed by the end of the first semester.

● The Convener, DRC (Department Research and Postgraduate Committee)/Coordinator,
IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Program Committee) would advise until the student is
assigned to regular supervisor(s). 

● There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional
supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.

● A supervisor from outside the institute, before qualifier, may be appointed on the
request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean
(Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate. 

● The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and
Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial
point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external  supervisor.

16.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the

DRC/IRC shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the
student to take care of the administrative requirements.

● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an
additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor.

● The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the
supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor. 

● The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as supervisor and
will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared the qualifier
before supervisor’s retirement/resignation. 

16.1.4 Composition of Departmental Research Committee (DRC)
The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs of
the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed by
the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by a Professor/Associate Professor nominated by the Head of
the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The
DRC has to be approved by the Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the
convenor of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years. 

16.1.5 Composition of Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC) 
The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the
chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a
member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure
for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics). 

16.2 Change of Research Supervisor
Change   of   supervisor(s) under   exceptional   circumstances   shall   be permitted by Dean
(Academics) on recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent   of   
(i)   the   student   (ii)   the   present   supervisor(s)   and   (iii)   the proposed supervisor(s). 
If required, realignment of student’s research program will happen under supervision of the
DRC/IRC.



16.3 Student Research Committee (SRC) 
16.3.1 Composition of SRC 

● The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members
conversant with the field of research with at least one-member external to the
department (may be outside the Institute also). 

● A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the
supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by the Dean (Academics). 

● The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and
the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean
(Academics).

● The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
● Any   subsequent   changes   in   the composition of SRC shall be communicated through

the DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record. 
● The SRC and supervisor(s) shall be the   internal examiners for the evaluation of the

thesis.
● The   SRC   is   expected   to   monitor   the   progress   of   the   candidate   until   the

completion of the program.

16.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)
Academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the SRC and
peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii) A Poster
Presentation open to all. SRC will award Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based upon (i) and
(ii). Two consecutive non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration. 
For implementational convenience, the academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for
conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following groupings of students and
scheduling guidelines are suggested 

1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working
Date of September of every year

2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working
Date of February of every year

The first APM will be conducted after successful completion of qualifier requirements. Those
students who have got 6 months extension to complete qualifier requirements, for them APM
can be scheduled even after a semester from the date of completion of qualifier
requirements. Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be
reported by supervisor(s) through the SRC for record.  

Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and
approved by Dean (academics)

16.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student
The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a
Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.

1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 12.8.1 
2. Cleared comprehensive examination
3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research 



4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal 

The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and in any
case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the Ph. D.
program. Part-time and direct Ph.D. candidates will need to complete qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the seventh semester. M.Tech.-Ph.D. candidates will need to complete
qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester and in any case not later than
the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the program. For M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual
degree students, the 16 credits associated with the M.Tech. project II are to be converted to the
RP.

16.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student
● The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the

student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the
field of research. 

● The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination
Committee of the Department/IDRP.

● The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.
● Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting the comprehensive examination.

Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. Course
content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and Senate. The
syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses
offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in
that area.

● The SRC will specify a set of three papers as comprehensive requirements for a particular
student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.

● The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student
within two weeks of SRC formation. 

● All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can
coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may
decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days. 

● A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed
the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.

● If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first
attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear during
the next scheduled comprehensive examination as per the academic calendar. For valid
medical or unforeseen reasons, if a student is not able to register for the comprehensive
examination, the comprehensive examination may be rescheduled within that semester
with prior approval to the Dean/Associate Dean (PG- Programs).

● For clearing the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all
papers.



Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:
● Ph.D.: within 3 semesters
● Direct Ph.D. and Part-Time Ph.D.: within 5 semesters

16.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)

Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State of
Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area.
The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory grade in
SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal. The State of the Art
seminar must be completed before finalization of the research proposal. For M.Tech.-Ph.D.
students, the presentation in M.Tech. Project I will be considered as SOTA.

16.5.3 Research Proposal
Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion
of SOTA. The Research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to
research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the
candidate.

16.6 Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree
A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D.
degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such students
who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis.

The time-lines for comprehensive examination, state of the art seminar and candidacy
examination are summarized in Table 12.9 .
Table 12.9 Timelines for comprehensive examination, state of the art seminar and candidacy
examination

Sr. No. Ph.D. (Regular) Ph.D. (Part-time) Ph.D. (Direct) M.Tech.-Ph.D.

Comprehensive 3 Semesters 5 Semesters 5 Semesters 3 Semesters
Examination
State-of-the-Art 3 Semesters 5 Semesters 5 Semesters 3 Semesters
Seminar
Candidacy 4 Semesters 6 Semesters 6 Semesters 4 Semesters
Examination

16.7 Relaxation in  M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program
● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier

requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also
convert into part-time/external Ph.D. students and exit with M.Tech degree if all
conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.

● The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if
SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends continuance of registration.



16.8 Cancellation of Registration
● The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC or

who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.
● The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the

maximum permissible period specified in Section 11.5 will be liable for cancellation.

16.9 Synopsis
● Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal close door

assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC.
● The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied about the quality and

quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.
● Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis

report.
● Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar

date. If required, an extension of three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics)
on the recommendation of SRC.

● If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be
asked to present the synopsis again.

● On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in
4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis, the
student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in the
required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for
consideration of the SRC.

● The student should have at least two publications in Scopus indexed journals and/or A+
conferences for Engineering and Science Departments. Requirements for the
Department of Humanities and School of Management & Entrepreneurship will be
specified separately.

16.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation  
The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty Members
from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in which the
student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, following guidelines should be followed

● The examiners shall have at least 6 years Post-Ph.D. experience;
● No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and
● The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute. 
● Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners.
● The Chairman, Senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of

which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these
examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. In addition, the SRC and
Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.

● The Indian examiners shall attend in person the Thesis Defense.
● The examiners shall submit a written report on the Thesis within a period of two months

from the date of receipt of the Thesis.
● If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean

(Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.  



● If any of the examiners rejects the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration.
The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special
circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.
program.

● If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be
awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the
Ph.D. program. 

● If an examiner suggests revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis after
the revision within a prescribed time period of 6 months in consultation with the
Supervisor(s).    

● When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the
Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the
suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the
Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.

● The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within India
and other Faculty Members, who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the
student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their
recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to the Senate, to consider the
award of Ph.D. degree to the student.

17. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation, if she/he has met the
requirements laid down in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4 below.
17.1 Minimum Residential Requirement 
Table 17.1 Minimum residential requirement 
S.No. Program  Qualifications at the time of joining the Minimum Duration (in

Program semesters) of Residence 
1. M.Sc.  All qualifying degrees 4
2. M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual All qualifying degrees 7

Degree
3. M.Tech. Programs

Full-time Regular All qualifying degrees 3
/Sponsored

Part-time/ Part-time All qualifying degrees 0
Executive
Executive All qualifying degrees 1

4. Ph. D. Programs
Engineering discipline  M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an 2 

Engineering discipline
M.Sc. degree  in a Science discipline 5 
B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering)  in an 5
Engineering discipline



Science, Humanities or M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a 2
Social Science discipline  Science, Humanities or Social Science

discipline

Part-time All qualifying degrees 0
External All qualifying degrees 1

17.2 Academic 
The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned
the minimum credits as per Section 12.3 for M. Sc., Section 12.4 for M. Tech., Section 12.5 for M.
Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 12.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 12.7 for Ph.D.,
while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 12.8.

17.3 No Dues Clearance
The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as
deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).

17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action 
The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if
there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him. 

17.5 Award of Degrees 
17.5.1 Provisional Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can be
provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman,
Senate.

17.5.2 Degree Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is
recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate
degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its
approval. 

17.6 Withdrawal of Degree 
Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation
requirements is detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors
for withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student.

18. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the
right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes
at IIT-Jodhpur.



Curriculum 
M.Tech. CPS 

 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 

C EEL7XX0 Introduction to Cyber- 3-0-0 3  C EEL7XX0 Data Communication 2-0-2 3 
Physical Systems and Networking 

C EEL7XX0 Embedded System 3-0-0 3  C EEL7XX0 Advanced Control 3-0-0 3 
Design System 

E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3  E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3 
E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3  E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3 

NG1 HSN7XX0 Non-graded course 1-0-0 S/X  NG2 HSN7XX0 Non-graded course 1-0-0 S/X 
           
         

Total 12  Total 12 
III Semester  IV Semester 

T MET8XXo Thesis  16  T MET8XX0 Thesis  16 
           

Total 16  Total 16 
 

Electives 
 

S.No. Course Number Course Title L-T-P course credit 

1  Security of  CPS 2-0-0 2 

2  Linear System 3-0-0 3 
Theory 

3  Mobile Robots  3-0-0  3  

4  Artificial 3-0-0  3  
Intelligence  

5  Computer Vision  3-0-0  3  

6  Machine Learning   3-0-0  3  

7  Networked 3-0-0  3  
Dynamical 

Systems and 
Control  

8  Applied Linear 3 
Algebra 3-0-0 

9  Statistical Signal 3 
Analysis 3-0-0 

10  Robotics 3-0-0 3 

11  Deep Learning 3-0-0 3 



12   3-0-0 3 
Sensors and 

Measurement 

 
 
 

S.No. Category Course Category Title Total Courses Total Credits 
1 C  COMPULSORY 4 12 
2 E  ELECTIVES 4 12 
3 NG Non-Graded 2 0 
3 T Thesis 2 (16+16) 32 

Total     56 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
M.Tech in Sensors and Internet of Things 

 
Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 

C EEL7040 Sensors and 3-0-0 3  C EEL7200 Data 2-0-2 3 
Measurement Communication and 

Networking 
C EEL7170 Introduction to IoT 2-0-2 3  E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3 

Systems 
C EEL71570 Hardware Software 3-0-0 3  E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3 

Co-Design 
E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3  E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3 

NG1 HSN7XX0 Non-Graded I 1-0-0 S/X  NG2 HSN7XX Non-Graded II 1-0-0 S/X 
0 

Total 12  Total 12 
III Semester  IV Semester 

T MET8XXo Thesis  16  T MET8XX Thesis  16 
0 

Total 16  Total 16 
 

 
Electives 

S.No. Course Number Course Title   
1  Microsystem Fabrication Technology 2-0-2 3 
2  Analog and Interfacing Circuits 3-0-0 3 
3  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks 3-0-0 3 
4  Fundamentals of Machine Learning 3-0-2 4 
5  In-memory computing 2-0-0 2 
6  Point of care devices/diagnostics 3-0-0 3 
7  Wireless Communication 3-0-0 3 
8  Nano sensors 3-0-0 3 
9  Embedded System Design 3-0-0 3 
10  Hardware Design for Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 
11  Virtualization and Cloud Computing  3-0-0 3 
12  Digital VLSI Design 3-0-0 3 

 



Title Introduction to Internet of Things Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide overview of applications of IoT and relevant technologies 
 
Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Identify and integrate different components required for IoT applications 
 
Contents  
EEL7XX1: IoT Systems Architecture 
Sensing, Actuation, Basics of IoT Networking (4 Lectures) 
IoT Architecture, Communication Protocols for IoT (4 Lectures) 
Sensor Networks: Wireless Sensor Network, Sensor nodes (2 Lectures) 
Machine to machine Communication: Introduction, Node types and M2M Applications, Integration of 
Sensors and Actuators for Implementation of IoT (4 Lectures) 
 
EEL7XX2: Embedded Computing and IoT Applications 
Introduction to Raspberry Pi and other MCUs used in IoT (4 Lectures) 
Software defined IoT Networking (2 Lectures) 
Introduction to Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing (4 Lectures)  
IoT Use Cases - Smart cities and Smart homes, Industrial IoT, Healthcare IoT, Smart Grid (4 
Lectures) 
 
Lab Component 
The lab course will be dependent on the various core and elective components of the program. There 
will be a scope for modifying the contents depending on the recent developments in technology. 
Experiments from some of the following topics will be part of this lab.  

• Implementation of Signal Conditioning Circuits  
• Implementation of IoT components using Hardware/Software 
• Sensor interfacing using off-the-shelf components 
• Programming of MCUs used in IoT like Raspberry Pi 
• Implementation of real time examples of IoT using Embedded Systems 
• Introduction to EDA tools, hardware-software co-design, computational models in Embedded 

design. 
 
Indicative Assignments: 
The assignments will involve programming of MCUs using C and Python. These programming 
assignments will complement the lab sessions. 
 
Textbook  
1. Kamal, R., (2017), Internet of Things - Architecture and Design Principles, 1st Edition, Mcgraw 

Hill. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Misra, S., Introduction to Internet of Things, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Computer 

Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105166/ 



Course Title Sensors and measurements Course No. EE6XX 
Department Electrical Engineering Structure (LTPC) 3 0 0 3 
Offered for M. Tech. (Sensors and IoT) Status Program Core 
Pre-requisite Semiconductor Devices  To take effect from 2019 
 
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduction to sensors, as transducers from physical parameters to signals 
2. Sensing principles for displacement, force, pressure, acceleration, temperature, optical radiation, nuclear 

radiation 
3. Sensor range, sensitivity, accuracy, repeatability, noise 
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to learn 
1. Fundamental principles of sensing technology,  
2. Design of various sensors, and implementation, 
3. Nondestructive characterization methods 

 
Course Content 
Introduction to Transducers and Sensor characteristics: Definitions, terminology, classification, Static vs dynamic 
properties of transducers, Transfer functions, Ideal and realistic transducer models, Resolution, linearization, 
dynamic range, detection threshold, Selectivity & sensitivity, Calibration, Errors of the experimental 
measurements, Noise: electronics, environmental & internal (14 lectures)  
 
Physical Principle of Sensing: Capacitance, Magnetism, Induction, Resistance, Piezoelectric effect, Pyroelectric 
effect, Hall effect, Thermoelectric effect, Temperature and thermal properties of materials and heat transfer, 
Optics, Fiber optics and waveguides (14 lectures) 
 
Interface Electronic Circuits: Input characteristics of interface circuits, Amplifiers, Light to voltage converters, 
Capacitance to voltage converters, Bridge Circuits, Excitation circuits (4 Lectures) 
 
Case Studies: Inertial Sensors (Accelerometer & gyroscope), Healthcare Sensors (Glucometer, ECG & MRI), Smart 
building Sensors (Smoke & occupancy sensors) (10 lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Jacob Fraden, Handbook of Morden Sensors, Springer 2010. 
2. D. V. S. Murthy, Transducers in Instrumentation, Prentice Hall, 1995. 
3. J. W. Gardner, Microsensors, Principles and Applications, Wiley, 1996. 
4. S. M. Sze, Semiconductor Sensors, Wiley, 1994 

 



Title Data Communication and Networking Number EEL7XX0 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Wireless Communications,   

Probability Theory and Random Process 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Expose the students to distinguished features of Wireless Networks. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and optimize wireless network architectures 
2. Develop end-to-end IoT applications utilizing suitable data communication and networking 

technologies 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals (4 Lectures):  
 Overview of the communication layers’ architecture (1 Lecture) 
 QoS parameters, Data communication technologies: QoS perspective and layer-wise technologies 

used (3 Lectures) 
Network Deployment and Management (3 Lectures):  
 Network Topologies (1 Lecture) 
 Node/network localization and deployment map generations (2 Lectures)  
MAC Layer Analysis (7 Lectures): 
 Markov process, Single and Multi-Server Queues (M/M/1, M/M/c) with finite and infinite queue 

sizes (3 Lectures) 
 Contention and contention-free channel access mechanisms (2 Lectures) 
 Performance modeling and analysis of CSMA/CA with finite packet queues (2 Lectures) 
Network Layer Analysis (8 Lectures):  
 Design constraints, Bounded latency networks (2 Lectures) 
 Routing algorithms - Analysis and optimization (3 Lectures) 
 Self-organizing Networks (1 Lecture) 
 Motivation for cross-layer protocol design (2 Lectures) 
Transport Layer (2 Lectures): 
 TCP, UDP, Congestion Control 
Discussion on Recent Advancements (4 Lectures) 
 Introduction to NFV, Network slicing (2 Lectures) 
 Energy efficient protocols and energy harvesting techniques (2 Lectures) 
 
Lab Component (14 sessions): 
 Introduction to existing simulation tools, and hands on-session for Simulation Tool  
 NS3 simulations for MAC layer and Network layer performance analysis for WPANs  
 Analytical and Simulation co-validation for MAC and Network protocols 
 End-to-End IoT Application Development (Multi-node multi-parameter sensing system 

development, Edge processing, RF communication, Cloud integration, Data analytics and alerts)  
 
Indicative Assignments and Self-Study Components: 
 Assignments on MAC layer analysis, network layer analysis, and transport layer using tools such 

as Wireshark, NS3 will be provided 
 Self-study topics include deeper analytical analysis of MAC layer, network layer, and transport 

layer protocols will be suggested. 
 



Textbook: 
1. Dargie, W., and Poellabauer, C., (2010), Fundamentals of Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and 

Practice, Wiley 
2. Stallings, W., (2007), Data and Computer Communications, 8th Edition, Pearson 
3. Bertsekas, D. P. and Gallager, R. G., (1992), Data Networks, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
4. Stallings, W., High-speed Networks and Internets: Performance and Quality of Service, 2nd 

Edition, Prentice Hall 
Reference Book 
1. Ian F. Akyildiz and Mehmet Can Vuran, (2010), Wireless Sensor Networks, A John Wiley and Sons 

Ltd. Publication. 
  



Course Title  Hardware Software Co-Design Number   EEL7XX0 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital Logic and Design   
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 

1. Make the students analyze the functional and nonfunctional performance of system early 
in the design process to support design decisions. 

2. Make the students appreciate issues in system-on-chip (SoC) design associated with co- 
design, such as intellectual property, reuse, and verification. 

3. Explain the hardware, software, and interface synthesis  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Analyze hardware/software trade-offs, algorithms, and architectures to optimize the 
system based on requirements and implementation constraints. 

2. Understand issues in interface design. 
3. Use co-simulation to validate system functionality. 
 

Contents 
Introduction to ASIC design, combinational and sequential circuit design process (design using 
Verilog and VHDL), Finite state machines, Modelling styles and their applications (Concurrency, 
Communication and Computation models), RTL and memory models, Brief introduction to interfacing 
circuits/systems connecting analog & digital world, Motivation for HW/SW co-design (Embedded 
controller application etc.) (7 lectures) 
Programmable logic devices and FPGAs: PALs, PLDs, FPGA programming concepts and techniques, 
design synthesis using FPGA kits, Design optimization techniques (5 lectures) 
System-level and SoC design methodologies and tools; HW/SW co-specification and co-design (co-
design Finite state machines, CFSM)  principles: analysis, partitioning, real-time scheduling (7 
lectures) 
Hardware acceleration; Virtual platform models, co-simulation methodologies and FPGAs for 
prototyping of HW/SW systems (5 lectures);  
Transaction-Level Modeling (TLM), Electronic System-Level (ESL) languages, UML:SystemC, Design 
development with SystemC; (5 lectures) 
High-Level Synthesis(HLS) and associated optimization techniques at each stage: allocation, 
scheduling, binding, resource sharing, pipelining, co-synthesis methods (6 lectures);  
SoC and IP integration issues (on-chip bus, network-on-chip) and optimization for resource-
constrained operation in different usage environments, Introduction to SoC verification, test & pre-
/post-silicon debug methodologies, ARM-based System-on-Chip Design Techniques with HW/SW 
approach, One practical SoC design case  study in complete detail (7  lectures) 
 
 Lab Component:  Interfacing, data analytics and data processing of different types of sensors at 
the system level using FPGA, system level implementation of various digital correction and 
calibration techniques. This will internally include combinational circuit and sequential logic design, 
clock issues and timing constraints. Application-specific System/Processor Design and Simulation, 
SystemC -based Microprocessor & Accelerator design implementation, performance evaluation and 
optimization, On-chip interconnect network analysis (e.g.- Network-on-chip simulation), Realization 
of co-designed HW system on FPGA board(s) and analysis of observed results (complete project 
beginning from co-specification to co-design, co-synthesis and verification) 
 
Indicative Assignments: (a) Design of moderately complex system (e.g.- sequence detector/ 
router/ multi-level elevator controller) in any HDL and its simulation using Modelsim (Mentor)/ 
GHDL(open source)/ Icarus(open source)/ VCS (Synopsys) tools  
(b) Implementation of designed system on FPGAs using Quartus/ Xilinx Vivado tools  
(c) Implementation of partitioning/scheduling algorithm in Python/C 
(d)  Realization of RTL synthesis with Yosys(open source)/ RTL Compiler(Cadence)/ Design 
Compiler(Synopsys) tools 



(e) Implementing standalone designs in SystemC, its compilation, simulation and debug. 
 
 
Text Books 
1. Jørgen Staunstrup, Wayne Wolf (1997), Hardware/Software Co-design: Principles and Practice, 

Springer 
2. Unsalan, C., Tar, B., (2017), Digital System Design with FPGA Implementation Using Verilog 

and VHDL, McGraw-Hill 
3. D. Black, J. Donovan, (2010), SystemC: From the Ground Up, 2 nd Edition, Springer 
4. D. Gajski, S. Abdi, A. Gerstlauer, G. Schirner, (2009), Embedded System Design: 

Modeling, Synthesis, Verification, Springer 
 
Preparatory Course material 
1. Nelson, V.P., Carroll, B.D., Nagle, H.T., Irwin, J.D., (2020), Digital Logic Circuit analysis and 

Design, 2nd Edition, Pearson 
2. G. De Micheli, (2017), Synthesis and Optimization of Digital Circuits, McGraw-Hill. 

 
  



  

 

  

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur  

  
  

    
  
  
 

M.Tech. in Communication Systems 
(previously M.Tech. in Intelligent Communication Systems)  

Revised Curriculum Structure for AY 2025-26 Onwards 
  

 
  
  
  

  
  

  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
Introduction 
During the past few years, there has been an exponential growth in the usage of internet. The fast 
development of economy and society requires modern and high-performance communications systems 
that can cater for massive deployment of Internet of Things, while still offering acceptable levels of energy 
consumption, equipment cost and network deployment and operation cost. It needs to support a wide 
variety of applications and services requiring increased spectral efficiency, higher data rates, low latency 
and high reliability. Communication technologies need to meet the growing connectivity requirements for 
new use cases (e.g. for ultra-low latency or high reliability cases) and new applications for industry, 
opening new revenue streams also for operators. The M. Tech. program in Communication Systems 
prepares students for an advanced engineering career by in-depth understanding of modern 
communication systems at all layers and their associated signal processing methods. The program 
provides students with an opportunity to learn the specialization in depth by updating and renewing their 
technical knowledge in a rapidly changing telecommunication industry. 
 
Objective of the Program 
Graduates from the program will have in-depth knowledge and critical awareness of theoretical and 
practical solutions to problems at the forefront of communications and the processing of signals. They 
would be ready for careers in fields such as development, research, operations and management of next-
generation telecommunication networks and information processing systems. 
 
Graduate Attributes 

 The graduates of this program will have strong fundamentals in modern communications 
technology and signal processing methods. 

 Understanding of cutting-edge research on future generations of wireless communication.  
 Analytical and experimental skills required to design and implement next-generation 

communication systems for various applications like Internet-of-Things, smart health, Smart City, 
Intelligent Transportation Systems 

 Ability to do critical and creative thinking, and to conduct independent and original research and 
scholarship 

 Ability to apply existing skills and knowledge to identify and formulate new problems, produce new 
ideas, approaches or actions 

 Ability to teach and express ideas in both written and oral formats 
 
Learning outcome 

• Ability to statistically characterize and evaluate the performance of communication systems. 
• Ability to apply the different methods for signal detection and estimation to real world engineering 

problems and advanced research 
• Develop understanding of cutting-edge research on future generations of wireless communication.   
• Analyze multi-user networks and understanding of techniques like opportunistic communication, 

multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successive interference cancellation 
• Implement end-to-end wireless communication systems with various MIMO technologies like 

maximal ratio combining, OFDM, interleaving/de-interleaving, and Alamouti codes 
• Ability to master a specific set of methods appropriate to their dissertation, with the depth needed 

to produce methodologically rigorous research. 
• Carry out research work demonstrating scientific problem solving and generate IPR 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Program’s Structure 
 

Overall Structure (M. Tech. Degree Requirements for Communication Systems) 
 

Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 
I Semester  II Semester 

C EEL7XX0 Applied Linear 3-0-0 3  C EEL7XX0 Wireless 3-0-0 3 
Algebra  Communications 

C EEL7XX0 Statistical Signal 3-0-0 3  E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3 
Analysis 

C EEL7XX0 Digital 3-0-0 3  E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3 
Communications 

E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3  E EEL7XX0 Elective 3-0-0 3 
NG1 HSN7XX0 Non-Graded I 1-0-0 S/X  NG2 HSN7XX0 Non-Graded II 1-0-0 S/X 

Total 12  Total 12 
III Semester  IV Semester 

T EET8XXo Thesis  16  T EET8XX0 Thesis  16 
Total 16  Total 16 

 
 
Topic Clouds 
 

Applied Linear Algebra  Statistical Signal Digital Communications Wireless 
Analysis Communications 

 Fundamental  Random Processes  Signal  Fading channel 
Concepts of Linear  Stationarity and Representation and models 
Algebra  Ergodicity Digital Modulation  Error performance in 

 Eigenvalues,  Schemes 
 AWGN and fading 

Random parameter 
Eigenvectors, and  Receiver Design, channels 

estimation 
Diagonalization Sufficient Statistics  Diversity Techniques 

 Non-random 
 and Performance 

Matrix Theory &  Capacity of fading 
parameter Analysis 

Factorization  channels 
estimation  Carrier and Symbol  Multiuser systems- 

 Matrix Computations  Multiple parameter Synchronization multiple and random 
in Signal Processing & estimation  Introduction to access techniques 
Communications Coding and design  Multiuser diversity 

tradeoffs  Ad-Hoc Networks 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
List of Program Electives  
    

S. No. Course Number Course Title L-T-P Credits 
1 EEL7240 Cellular Communication Networks 3-0-0 3 
2 EEL7200 Data Communication and Networking 2-0-2 3 
3 EEL7110 MIMO Wireless Communications 3-0-0 3 
4 EEL7990 RF system design for Communications 3-0-0 3 
5 EEL7630 Coding Theory 3-0-0 3 
6 EEL71320 Network Information Theory 3-0-0 3 
7 EEL7760 Design and Analysis of Communication 3-0-0 3 

Networks 
8 EEL7030 Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 
9 EEL7930 Optical Communication Systems 3-0-0 3 
10 CSL7620 Machine Learning 3-0-0 3 
11 CSL7590 Deep Learning 3-0-0 3 
12 EEL7480 Machine Learning for Communications 3-0-0 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Curriculum of Core Courses 
 
Title:  Applied Linear Algebra  Number EEL7XX0 

: 
Department: Electrical Engineering L-T-P 3-0-0 [3] 

[C] 
Offered for:  M. Tech. and Ph.D.  
Type: Core Course for Communication and Signal 

Processing groups 
Objectives: 
        The instructor will: 

1. introduce fundamental definitions and concepts of Linear Algebra 
2. introduce matrix computations required for signal processing and communication 

Learning Outcomes: 
        At the end of the course, the students will be able to: 
        1. Analyze vector spaces, orthogonality, and linear transformations to establish  
            mathematical foundations for signal processing and communication 
        2. Apply matrix computations and factorizations to solve problems in signal 
processing and communication. 
 
Contents: 
Fundamental Concepts of Linear Algebra (12 Lectures) 
Algebra of Matrices, Systems of Linear Equations, Vector Spaces & Subspaces, Linear 
Dependence and Independence, Inner Product Spaces, Norms, orthogonality, Gram-
Schmidt process, Linear Transformations & Change of Basis 
 
Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, and Diagonalization (9 Lectures) 
Eigenvalues & Eigenvectors, Diagonalization & Spectral Theorem, Jordan Canonical Form 
– Generalized eigenvectors and applications, Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), 
Pseudoinverse & Moore-Penrose Inverse 
 
Matrix Theory & Factorization (12 Lectures) 
Matrix Operations – Rank, inverse, determinant, trace, Special Matrices – Symmetric, 
skew-symmetric, Hermitian, Toeplitz, circulant matrices, LU Decomposition, QR 
Factorization, Cholesky Decomposition 
Matrix Computations in Signal Processing & Communications (9 Lectures) 
Fourier & Wavelet Transforms in Matrix Form, Fast Algorithms in Signal Processing, 
Compressive Sensing & Sparse Signal Recovery, Signal Subspace Estimation and Array 
Processing, Linear and Quadratic programming 
 
Textbook: 

1. Strang, Gilbert. Linear Algebra and Its Applications 4th ed. 2012. 
2. Meyer, Carl D. Matrix analysis and applied linear algebra. Society for Industrial 

and Applied Mathematics, 2023. 

Self-learning Material:  
Strang, Gilbert., Linear Algebra, Spring 2010, MIT OpenCourseWare, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/18-06-linear-algebra-spring-2010/  
Rao, Vittal., Advanced Matrix Theory and Linear Algebra for Engineers, NPTEL Course 
ID 111108066: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111108066  
 



Title:  Statistical Signal Analysis Number: EEL7XX0 
Department: Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for:  M. Tech. and Ph.D.  
Type: Core Course for Communication and Signal 

Processing groups 
Objectives: 
        The instructor will: 

1. introduce fundamental definitions and concepts of Probability, Random Variables and 
Random Processes 

2. provide background to understand the fundamental aspects of parameter estimation and 
hypothesis testing  

Learning Outcomes: 
        The students will be able to: 

1. perform filtering, parameter estimation, and hypothesis testing concepts of signal detection 
and estimation for deterministic and random signals  

2. apply the theoretical knowledge to applications in communication, machine learning, 
optimization, and signal processing 

Contents: 
Review of Probability Theory (8 Lectures) 
Introduction to Probability Theory, Conditional Probability & Bayes’ Theorem, Independence, Conditional 
independence, Markov property, Discrete Random Variables, Continuous Random Variables, Expectation, 
Characteristic and Moment-Generating Functions, Joint Distributions of Multiple Random Variables, 
Functions of Random Variables, Conditional Expectation, Law of Large Numbers and Central Limit 
Theorems 
 
Stochastic Processes and Linear Filtering (14 Lectures) 
Stochastic Processes, Classification and characterization, Stationarity & Ergodicity, Gaussian and Poisson 
Processes, Markov Chains and Markov Processes, Spectral Representation of Stochastic Processes, Power 
Spectral Density (PSD), Linear Systems with Random Inputs, White Noise & Colored Noise Models, Wiener 
Filter, Least Squares Estimation and Linear Prediction, Kalman Filtering 
 
Parameter Estimation (10 Lectures) 
Parameter Estimation: Introduction to Statistical Estimation: Bias, Variance, MSE, Maximum Likelihood 
Estimation (MLE), Cramér-Rao Bound (CRB) and Efficiency of Estimators, Bayesian Estimation: MMSE, 
MAP, and Posterior Distributions  
 
Hypothesis Testing and Detection (10 Lectures): 
Likelihood Ratio Test (LRT), Neyman-Pearson Theorem, Bayesian Hypothesis Testing, Minimum 
Probability of Error Criterion, Matched Filter, Energy Detector (6 Lectures) 
 
Textbook: 
Papoulis, Athanasios, and S. Unnikrishna Pillai. 2002. Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic 
Processes. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Kay,S.M., (1998), Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Vol. 1 Estimation Theory, 1st Edition, 
Prentice Hall 
Kay,S.M., (1998), Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Vol. 2 Detection Theory, 1st Edition, 
Prentice Hall 
Self-learning Material:  
Chakraborty, Mrityunjay. Probability and Random Processes, NPTEL Course ID 117105085: 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105085 
Sinha, Rohit, Signal Detection and Estimation Theory, NPTEL Course ID 117103018: 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103018   
 

 
 
 
 
 



 
Title Digital Communication Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech. and PhD  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Knowledge of Probability Theory and Fundaments of   

Communications 
 
Objectives 

The instructor will: 
1. Provide strong theoretical foundation of digital communication modulation schemes and 

performance evaluation. 
2. Help students understand the fundamentals of communication through band limited 

channels and synchronization. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

The students will be able to: 
1. Design receivers for optimum performance. 
2. Analyze communication systems for their bit error performance.   
 
Contents  
Signal Representation and Digital Modulation Schemes (8 Lectures)  
     Complex baseband representation of signals, Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization procedure, 

M-ary orthogonal signals, bi-orthogonal signals, simplex signal waveforms, Memoryless 
modulation schemes, signaling schemes with memory, power spectral density of digitally 
modulated signals  

Receiver Design, Sufficient Statistics and Performance Analysis (14 Lectures)  
     Coherent and non-coherent demodulation: Matched filter, Correlator demodulator, square-

law, and envelope detection; Detector: Optimum rule for ML and MAP detection 
Performance: Bit-error-rate, symbol error rate for coherent and non-coherent schemes, 
Recurrent Neural Networks and their use for robust and adaptive receiver design  

Carrier and Symbol Synchronization (4 Lectures) 
     carrier recovery and symbol synchronization in demodulation, carrier phase estimation,   
     symbol timing estimation  
Introduction to Coding (12 Lectures) 
     Linear block codes, properties and examples, soft decision decoding, hard decision 

decoding, convolutional codes, Viterbi decoding  
Design Tradeoffs (4 Lectures) 
     Rate, bandwidth efficiency, power efficiency, modulation and coding tradeoffs  
 
Textbook  
1. Proakis, J. G. and Salehi, M., (2007), Digital Communications, 5th Edition, McGraw-Hill 
2. Madhow, U., (2008), Fundamentals of Digital Communication, 1st Edition, Cambridge 

University Press 
3. Barry, J. R., Lee, E. A., and Messerschmitt, D. G., (2004), Digital Communications, 3rd 

Edition, Springer 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, Department of Electrical Engineering, 

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Title Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.)  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
 
Objectives  

The instructor will: 
1. Provide students with an understanding of the concepts related to communication over wireless fading 

channel. 
2. Expose students to concepts and techniques for exploiting fading and application of these concepts in 

multiuser communication systems context. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

The students will be able to: 
1. Interpret and apply core principles of deep fading, diversity strategies, and channel capacity in the 

context of point-to-point wireless communication systems. 
2. Analyze multi-user networks and understanding techniques like opportunistic communication, 

multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successive interference cancellation. 
3. Analyze and design wireless ad-hoc networks with special emphasis on energy constrained networks 
 
Contents  
Wireless Channels [10 Lectures]: 
Review of signal detection over AWGN channels and M-ary Modulation (5L) 
Modelling of wireless channels; space, time and frequency channel coherence; input/output channel 
models for single and multi-antenna systems - SIMO, MISO, and MIMO (5L) 
 
Diversity Techniques [14 Lectures]: 
Digital modulation and its performance in fading (4L) 
Deep fade and diversity (3L) 
Realizing diversity: time diversity (1L), frequency diversity (3L), antenna diversity – SIMO, MISO, and 
MIMO (3L) 
 
Wireless Channel Capacity [11 Lectures]: 
Capacity of the Gaussian channels –SISO, SIMO, MISO and MIMO (4L) 
Outage limited and ergodic capacity of fading channels (4L) 
Water filling algorithm and opportunistic communication (3L) 
 
Multiuser system design [7 Lectures]: 
Multiple access techniques (2L) 
Multiuser channel capacity and multiuser diversity (5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication, Cambridge University 

Press. 
2. Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3. Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004), Digital communication over fading channels, John Wiley and 

Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng, L., Principles of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & 

Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-principles-of-wireless-communications-spring-
2006/index.htm 

     
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/  
2. Zheng, L. and Gallager, R., Principles of Digital Communications I, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-450-principles-of-digital-
communications-i-fall-2006/ 

 
 
 



 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2nd year B.Tech Electrical Engineering 
Curriculum Structure 

August 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2nd year B.Tech Electrical Engineering 
Curriculum Structure 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



1. Introduction 

The vision of the Department is to develop a world class teaching and research atmosphere by excelling in 
fundamental knowledge and applications of Electrical Engineering through curricular and co-curricular 
activities. In line with this vision, the department offers an undergraduate program to attract highly motivated 
students who are interested in cutting-edge technologies in the broad discipline of electrical engineering, and 
wish for a flexible program to consider a variety of career paths through capability-linked specializations of their 
choice. 
 
The program provides strong fundamentals in mathematics and science which develop analytical thinking and 
form the basis of the diverse tool set used by electrical engineers to innovate, design and develop the technology 
of the future. The engineering design component is integrated throughout the curriculum, motivating and 
familiarizing students with the real-world engineering challenges and equipping them with the essential technical 
skills for problem solving. The early strong theoretical foundations and hand-on exposure are supplemented by 
the core electrical engineering concepts ranging from circuit analysis and design, computing, control, 
communication, signal processing, and power engineering. Additional problem-solving skills and practical 
experience are developed through design projects and laboratory experiments.  
 
The curriculum offers flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice. The 
department specializations are designed to enable students to lead technological innovations addressing the 
emerging industrial and societal challenges in various domains of electrical engineering. The EE students can opt 
for any one of the departmental specializations in Cyber Physical Systems, Intelligent Communication and Networking, 
Communication Engineering, VLSI Systems, Visual Computing, Socio-Digital Reality, Nano and Flexible Electronics, 
Smart Grid, and Artificial Intelligence of Things. The in-depth understanding and technical skills acquired through 
these specializations will enable graduates to play a vital role in advancement of technologies such as 5G/6G 
communications, smart cities, smart healthcare, and Industry 4.0. 
 
Another distinct feature of the curriculum is provision for minors in Entrepreneurship or Management or 
interdisciplinary specializations in Smart Healthcare, Artificial Intelligence, and Robotics and Mobility Systems that 
allow students to pursue diverse career goals. Students will also have an opportunity to opt for a B. Tech. - 
Master’s dual degree in their chosen specialization or minor area. The curriculum also offers numerous options 
that enable students to gain industrial experience through collaborative industrial projects at industries and 
entrepreneurship experience at the Institute's incubation centre. 
 
 
2. Objectives of the program 

The program aims at imparting theoretical foundations and practical skills of electrical engineering discipline. It 
prepares graduates for three potential career paths: 
1. An industrial path to take up the role of a technical leader or a manager through life-long learning. 
2. An entrepreneurial path to apply the acquired knowledge to develop new products and initiate Deep Tech 

Start-up Company. 
3. An academic path to enter a top-tier graduate program to conduct cutting-edge research with broad 

applications, and eventually to pursue a research or academic profession. 
 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
 
Graduates of the UG program in EE are expected to have following attributes: 
1. Strong understanding of fundamentals of mathematics, science and engineering with emphasis on electrical 

technologies for Communication, Signal Processing, Devices & Circuits, Computing Systems, Control 
Engineering, and Power Engineering 

2. Ability to apply technical skills to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems encountered in modern 
electrical engineering practices.  

3. Ability to model, analyze, design and experimentally evaluate electrical components or systems that achieve 
desired technical specifications, subject to certain resource constraints. 

1 
 



4. Ability to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements and assume leadership roles 
within academic, industrial, or entrepreneurial environments in the broad context of electrical engineering. 

5. Have established the foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse 
disciplines through minor/ graduate-level studies and the process of life-long learning. 

6. Ability to recognize and practice professional ethics in working environment. 
7. Ability to acquire new knowledge and integrate it in the existing paradigm so as to create new innovative 

electrical systems for the current and future usage and apply it as needed. 
 
 
4. Learning Outcomes 
 
The graduates of EE UG program will be able: 
1. To acquire knowledge of electrical engineering principles along with the required understanding of 

computing, engineering fundamentals, mathematics, and science.  
2. To apply the concepts of mathematics, sciences and engineering (including computing science) to analyze and 

design complex electrical and electronic circuits and systems containing hardware and software modules. 
3. To gain in-depth understanding of concepts of Signals, Devices, Circuits, Systems, Machine Learning, 

Programming, Control, Communications, Hardware Design and related interdisciplinary topics. 
4. To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, electrical engineering design and computing 

tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory 
exercises and design projects. 

5. To perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research. 
6. To adapt to work in multidisciplinary environment. 
7. To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities. 
8. To develop technical presentation skills and communicate effectively. 
9. To engage in independent learning in the context of technological advancements. 
10. To conduct develop attitude for product design and entrepreneurial activities. 
 
 
5. New skill sets targeted 

EE students explore subjects critical to advancement in today’s needs — from circuit design and electronics to 
computing, control and communication, and machine learning. The acquired knowledge will be helpful in future 
technologies including:  

1. 5G and Beyond Communications 
2. Cyber Physical Systems 
3. Nano-electronics and Quantum Devices 
4. Smart Grid 

2 
 



6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
 

Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 

Random Variables, Stochastic Processes, 
Probability, Statistics and 

Stationarity, Ergodicity, Discrete and 
Stochastic Processes (IE, MA) 

Continuous  Random Processes 
Signal and System Classification, LTI 
Systems Properties and Response,  Fourier, Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 

Core Laplace and z-Transform, Sampling  
EM Wave Propagation, Transmission Lines, Engineering Electromagnetics 
Waveguides and Antennas (PC) 
Modelling of Noise and Channels, Noise 

Communication Systems (PC) 
through LTI Systems, Modulation, Digital 

 
Baseband and Passband Transmissions,  
OSI Architecture, Source Coding, Error 
correction techniques, Queuing Theory, Data Communication Networks 
Switching Techniques, Controlled and (PC) 
Random Access, Routing, End-to-End  

Communi Reliability 
cation 

 Techniques Quantization, Discrete Fourier Transform, 
Digital Signal Processing (PC) 

Fast Fourier Transform, Circular 
 

Convolution, Multirate Signal Processing 
Source Coding, Channel Coding, Channel 

Information Theory and Coding 
Capacity Theorem, AWGN Channel 

(PE) 
Capacity, Multiuser Channel Capacity 

Cellular Communication 
Networks (PE) 

 Spread Spectrum 
 Communications (PE) 

Systems 5G and beyond Communications Satellite Communications (PE) 
 Microwave Engineering (PE) 
 Computer Networks (PE) 

Optical Communication 
Systems (PE) 

3 
 



EE UG – Communications Concentration Roadmap 

 

Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Probability, Random Variables, Probability, Statistics and 
Concentration bounds, Linear Prediction, Stochastic Processes (IE, 
Covariance Matrix, Random Processes, MA) 

Signals and Systems (IE, 
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI 

Core EE) 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization 

 
Basics of Complexity Analysis, Data Data Structures and 
Structures, Sorting, Searching, Shortest Algorithms (PC) 
Paths.  
Sampling and Reconstruction, Fourier 
Analysis (CTFT, DTFT), Discrete Fourier Digital Signal processing 

Signal Transform, Quantization Error Analysis,  (PC) 
Processing Finite Length Effects,  FIR and IIR Filter  

Techniques Design and Implementation, Multi-rate  
Systems 

Shannon’s lossless source coding theorem Information Theory and 
and rate-distortion theory Coding (PE) 

Signal Compression (PE) 
Speech Processing (PE) 

Systems Signal Processing and Interpretation System Identification (PE) 

Digital Image Processing 
(PE) 

4 
 



 
EE UG – Signal Processing Concentration Roadmap 

 

 
 

Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Signals Through LTI Systems 

Signals and Systems 
Fourier, Laplace and z-Transform 

(IE),  
Systems Modelling in Time and 

Circuit Theory (PC) 
Frequency Domain 

Core 
Classical Control Theory, Characteristics of 

Control System (PC) 
Feedback Systems, State-Space Analysis, 

 
Controller and Observer Design, Compensation 

 
Techniques 
Vector spaces and Linear operators, State 
Feedback for MIMO and SISO systems, 

 
Control Discrete time system, Linear system stability, 

Techniques Modern Control (PE) 
Engineering Controllability, observability, reachability and 

 
stabilizability, Reduced order observer 
design, Separation principle 

Nonlinear and 
Adaptive Control (PE) 

Robust and Optimal 
Control (PE) 

Systems Cyber-Physical Systems 
Foundations of Cyber-
Physical Systems (PE) 
Introduction to 
Robotics (PE) 

5 
 



 
EE UG – Control Engineering Concentration Roadmap 

 

 

Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Quantum Mechanical Tunneling Foundations of Quantum 
Bulk vs Quantum Properties Information Processing (IE, 
Crystals and Energy Bands PH) 

Material Science and 
Magnetic Materials 

Engineering (IE) 
Core Heat Transfer Thermodynamics  (IE, ME) 

Fourier Analysis Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 

Basic Circuit Theory Circuit Theory (PC) 
Engineering 

Devices Transmission Lines and Guiding Structures 
Electromagnetics  (PC) 

and 
Circuits Energy Band Formation, Drift and Diffusion, 

Physical Electronics (PC) 
Device Physics, MOS Capacitors and 

 
Transistors, High Power Devices, 

 
Unconventional Devices 
Review of MOSFETs, Single Stage and 

Techniques Analog Circuits (PC) 
Differential Amplifiers , Cascade and Cascode 

 
Amplifiers, Operational Amplifiers and 

 
Feedback, Small Signal and Frequency Response 

ASIC Design Flow, CMOS Implementation of VLSI Design (PE) 
Gates, Combinational and Sequential Circuits,  

6 
 



Static Timing Analysis, Floor planning and 
Routing, Packaging 

Integrated Circuit 
Technology (PE) 

Sensors and Actuators (PE) 
Systems Nano-electronics and Integrated Circuits 

CAD for VLSI(PE) 

Physics and Modeling of 
MOS Transistor (PE) 

 
EE UG – Devices and Circuits Concentration Roadmap 

 

 
 

 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 

Probability, Random Variables,  
Probability, Statistics and 

Concentration bounds, Linear 
Stochastic Processes (IE, MA) 

Prediction, Covariance Matrix,  
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI 

Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization 
Design of Digital Circuits Digital Design  (PC) 

Core 
Computing Implementation using Verilog/HDL  
Systems Basics of Complexity Analysis, Data Data Structure and Algorithms 

Structures, Sorting, Searching, Shortest (PC) 
Paths  

Pattern Recognition and 
Learning methods 

Machine Learning (IE) 
Techniques Pipelined Processing, Memory Computer Architecture (PC) 

Organization, Interfacing  

7 
 



Sampling Theory and Signal 
Reconstruction, Fast Fourier Transform, Digital Signal Processing (PC) 
Digital Filters 
Microprocessors and Microcontrollers, Embedded Systems (PC) 
Memory Interfacing, Arm Mbed  
Interfacing with GPIOs, Interfacing DC 
Motor, Keyboard Interfacing, Use of 

Digital Systems Lab (PC) 
Timers to produce delay, 
Implementation of Digital Filters  

Systems High Level Synthesis  (PE, CS) 
Real-Time Systems (PE) 
Reconfigurable Computing 

Embedded Computing and SoC (PE) 
Artificial Intelligence(PE, AI) 
Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing (PE, CS) 

 
EE UG – Computing Systems Concentration Roadmap 

 

 
 

Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI Signals and Systems (IE) 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization  
Network theorems, Step and impulse Circuit Theory (PC) 

Power response, Two-port network analysis,  
Core 

Engineering Three phase circuits  
Engineering Electromagnetics 

Maxwell’s equations, Wave propagation 
(PC) 

Thyristor, IGBT Physical Electronics (PC) 

8 
 



Transformers, DC machines, Induction 
Electrical Machines (PC) 

machines, Synchronous machines 
Electrical Machines Lab (PC) 

Control of machines using converters 
Transmission line modelling and 
performance, Per-unit representation of 

Techniques 
power system, Underground cables, 
Overhead line insulators, Power electronic Power Engineering (PC) 
converter based, compensation, Integration 
of renewable energy sources, Power system 
monitoring and protection 

Measurement and 
Instrumentation (PE) 
Power System Analysis and 
Stability (PE)  

Systems  Smart Grid Power System Operation and 
Control (PE) 
Power Electronics (PE) 
Industrial Drives  (PE) 

 
EE UG – Power Engineering Concentration Roadmap 

 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 



7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 

Table 2.ProposedCourse Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes 
S.N.  Course Type Course Category  Regular B.Tech. 

Credit  Total 
1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 

 Science (IS) 16 
Humanities (IH) 12 

2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 52 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 16 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 
5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 
Total Graded 150 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 
Engineering (NE) 3 
Design/Practical Experience (ND)  6 

Total Graded + Non-Graded   165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 



8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
  
Table 4.Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up to 6XXX Level) 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits  
Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours (TC=TH/3) 

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 



9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 

Table 5. Programme Compulsory Courses 
Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 

1 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 
2 Circuit Theory 3-0-0 3 3 
3 Engineering Electromagnetics 3-0-0 3 3 
4 Physical Electronics 3-0-0 3 3 
5 Digital Design 2-0-2 4 3 
6 Analog Circuits 3-0-3 6 4.5 
7 Electrical Machines 3-0-0 3 3 
8 Communication Systems 3-0-0 3 3 
9 Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 3 
10 Control Systems 3-0-3 6 4.5 
11 Digital Signal Processing 2-0-0 3 2 
12 Data Communication Networks 3-0-0 3 3 
13 Power Engineering 3-0-3 6 4.5 
14 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3 3 
15 Digital Systems Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
16 Electrical Machines Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
17 Communication Systems Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 

Total 52 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 
 



10. ScanArea-wise Programme Elective Courses 

Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses 
S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P Credit 

Information Theory and Coding (300) 3-0-0 3 
Computer Networks ( CS) 3-0-0 3 
Microwave Engineering (400) 3-0-0 3 

1 Communication Cellular Communication Networks(400) 3-0-0 3 
Satellite Communications (400) 3-0-0 3 
Spread Spectrum Communications(400) 3-0-0 3 
Optical Communication Systems (400) 3-0-0 3 
Digital Image Processing (400) 2-0-0 2 
Speech Processing (400) 2-0-0 2 

2 Signal Processing 
Signal Compression (400) 2-0-0 2 
System Identification (400) 2-0-0 2 
Modern Control (300) 3-0-0 3 
Nonlinear and Adaptive Control (400) 3-0-0 3 

Control 
3 Robust and Optimal Control (400) 3-0-0 3 

Engineering 
Foundations of Cyber Physical Systems (400) 3-0-0 3 
Introduction to Robotics ( IDRP) 3-0-0 3 
VLSI Design (300) 3-0-0 3 
Biosensors (300) 3-0-2 4 

Devices and Integrated Circuit Technology (700) 3-0-0 3 
4 

Circuits Sensors and Actuators (400) 3-0-0 3 
CAD for VLSI (700) 2-0-2 3 
Physics and Modeling of MOS Transistor (400) 3-0-0 3 
Deep Learning ( AI) 3-0-0 3 
High Level Synthesis ( CS) 3-0-0 3 

Computing 
5 Real-Time Systems (400) 3-0-0 3 

Systems 
Reconfigurable Computing (400) 3-0-0 3 
Pervasive and Mobile Computing (CS) 3-0-0 3 
Measurement and Instrumentation (300) 3-0-0 3 
Power System Analysis and Stability (400)  3-0-0 3 

Power 
6 Power System Operation and Control (400)  3-0-0 3 

Engineering 
Power Electronics (400)  3-0-0 3 
Industrial Drives (400)  3-0-0 3 

 
 
Mini-Project(0-0-6) 
Program elective component for 8th semester 
 
Design/Practical Experience (ND) 
Options: Three Summer Design Projects (0-0-4) for 2 Credits each or in regular semesters.   
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

13 
 



11. Specialization to be offered by the department 

Table 7. Specialization and courses 
Name of Introduction 

S. No. 
Specialization  

In today's world, there is a global interest to study systems that can interact with 
each other and the surrounding with cooperative objectives, because of the 
introduction of new and cheap computational and communication resources. 
Such systems are usually referred to as cyber-physical systems (CPS). Almost, 
everything around us constitutes a cyber-physical system. For instance, traffic 
networks, a swarm of unmanned vehicles, smart power distribution networks, 
etc., are some of the recent technological movements towards automation.  
 
The philosophy of the cyber-physical systems vertical is to familiarize students 
with the basic building blocks for the analysis and synthesis of such systems, 
along with hands-on experiments. The theme of this vertical span through the 
various core subjects ranging from design, control, and computing to safety and 
security of cyber-physical systems.  
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Robust and optimal control 3-0-0 
Nonlinear and Adaptive control 3-0-0 

Cyber Physical Modern Control 3-0-0 

System Networked Dynamical Systems and 
1 

 Control 3-0-0 

 Introduction to robotics 3-0-0 
Autonomous Systems 3-0-0 
Real-Time Systems 3-0-0 
Reconfigurable Computing 3-0-0 

Introduction to Cyber physical 
Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 

Systems 3-0-0/ Foundation of Cyber 
Measurement and Instrumentation 3-

Physical Systems* 3-0-0 
0-0 

 
Computer Networks 3-0-3 

Security in Cyber Physical Systems 2-
System Identification 3-0-0 

0-0  
Computer Vision 3-0-0 

 
Edge & Fog Computing 3-0-0 

Advanced Control System 3-0-0 
Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks 
(VANETs) 3-0-0 
Introduction to Smart Grid 3-0-0 
Smart Manufacturing 1-0-2 
Resource Constrained AI 3-0-0 
Industry 4.0: Applications in 
Manufacturing Systems1-0-0 
Optimization 1-0-0 
Specialization Project 0-0-12 

 
*If a student does Foundation of CPS, she/he will be exempted from Introduction to CPS course. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 



Name of Introduction 
S. No. 

Specialization  

The fast development of economy and society requires modern and high-
performance communications systems that can reliably communicate the 
massive amount of data originating from various sources including Internet of 
Things, while still offering acceptable levels of energy consumption, equipment 
cost and network deployment and operation cost. To achieve these objective 
communication engineers require a deep mathematical understanding of the 
trade-offs involved in efficient reliable communication design and circuits and 
systems for future communication systems. 
 
The core component of the Communication Engineering specialization enables 
students to face these challenges by focusing on topics involving 
communication theory, wireless networking and protocol design, security 
architectures, and system performance analysis. The elective bouquet provides 
students an opportunity to either gain required depth for graduate level 
academic programs of their choice or sufficient breadth to expose them to 
defining technology for future generation communication systems including 
optical and millimeter wave technologies. 
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Cellular Communication Networks 3-0-0 

Communication MIMO Wireless Communications 3-0-0 
2 

Engineering UAV Assisted Wireless Networks 3-0-0 
Spread Spectrum Communications 3-0-0 
Network Security 3-0-0 
Statistical Decision Theory 2-0-0 
Machine Learning for Communications 3-0-0 
Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 
Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 

Optical Communication 
Adaptive Signal Processing 3-0-0 

Systems(3-0-0) 
Quantum Communications 3-0-0 

 
Optical Techniques for Communications 2-0-2 

Wireless Communications 
Optical Signal Processing 3-0-0 

(3-0-0) 
Optical Fiber Communications 3-0-0 

 
Free Space Optical Communication 3-0-0 

Digital Communications: 
Optical Networks 3-0-0 

Hands-on (1-0-2) 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 
RF Integrated Circuits 3-0-0 
Millimeter Wave Technology 3-0-0 
RF System Design for Communications 3-0-0 
Radar Engineering 3-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication I 1-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 
Specialization Project 0-0-6 

The development of communications has vastly relied on theories and models, 
from information theory to channel modelling. These traditional approaches are 

Intelligent showing serious limitations, especially in view of the increased complexity of 
Communication communication networks. The advent of 5G is introducing new challenges for 

3 and Networking mobile communications service providers, and integrating artificial 
 intelligence/machine learning techniques into networks is one way the industry 
(EE, AI and CS) is addressing these complexities.  Advances in artificial intelligence, particularly 

taking advantage of rapidly increasing network and user behavior data, 
indicates a new technological frontier of communications and networking, not 

15 
 



only in new methodology in systems and network design, but also in new 
network architecture accommodating machine learning  for broader and 
efficient services.  
 
The main objective of specialization in Intelligent Communication and 
Networking is to introduce students to new trends, approaches, methods, 
systems, as well as communication network architectures and application of 
artificial intelligence and machine learning to address communication network 
management issues. 
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Computer Networks  
Computation Oriented Communications  
Machine Learning  for Communications 
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 

Design and Analysis of 
Real-Time Communications 

Communication Networks (3-0-2) 
Delay Tolerant Networks 

 
Cognitive Internet of  Vehicles 

Intelligent Radio Networks (3-0-2) 
Hardware-Aware Communications 

 
Selected Topics in Communication I 
Selected Topics in Communication II 
Selected Topics in Communication III 
Specialization Project 0-0-12 

This specialization is designed to attract highly motivated students who are 
interested in the signal processing domain with a focus on visual computing. 
Current and future industry trends indicate increased involvement of visual 
computing for various automation processes, healthcare, and entertainment. 
The designed curriculum aims to provide education with excellence in some of 
the emerging areas which fall under the broad umbrella of visual computing. 
The curriculum is designed to enable students in choosing a variety of career 
paths such as intelligent visual computing, industry, and entrepreneurship. 
Graduates with specialization in visual computing are expected to have the 
attributes such as strong understanding of fundamentals of Mathematics, Signal 
Processing, Speech Understanding, Computer Vision, Computer Graphics, 
Haptics, Multimedia Processing, and AR/VR. 
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  

Visual 
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Computing 
4  Computational Imaging 

(EE, CS, ME and Computational Photography 

AI) Video Processing and Analysis 
Bio-imaging 
Medical Image Analysis 
Image Synthesis 
Animations 

Computer Graphics  (3-0-0) Digital Image Processing 
Computer Vision (3-0-0) Selected Topic: Advancements in 
Visual Computing Lab (0-0-4) Computer Vision 

Selected Topics in Computer Vision  
Visual Perception 
Real-Time Vision Architectures 
Introduction to AR and VR 
Introduction to Haptics 
Advance Machine Learning 
Scalable Machine Learning 

16 
 



Compressive Sensing 
3D Shape Analysis 
Image and Video Forensics 
Specialization Project 0-0-6 

The ever growing presence of social media and the need for more realistic ways 
of interacting via the digital world is fuelling novel and exciting industry 
innovations. Many industrial players (Google, Facebook, Microsoft etc.) have 
now dedicated centres and futuristic plans in the said area. Hence, this 
specialization seeks to provide students with fundamental knowledge that will 
enable them to design and innovate in several related areas within the broad 
theme of socio-digital reality. 
 

Socio-Digital Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
5 Reality (8 credits) (12 Credits) 

(EE, CS and AI) Introduction to Haptics, 
Design Process, 
Speech Understanding, 

Social Network (3-0-0), Computer Graphics, 
Introduction to AR-VR (3-0-0) Human Computer Interface, 
Multimodal interface (0-0-4) Natural Language Understanding, 

Computer Vision, 
Image and Video Forensics 
Specialization Project 0-0-6 

Semiconductor devices have been at the core for advancement of the current IC 
industry. Till now, the technology has followed Moore’s law for scaling towards 
the sub-10 nm era. To accomplish that, various new materials and device 
structures have found a place in current generation chips. Moreover, various 
issues related to technology scaling such as quantum mechanical effects have 
found importance in R&D for new generation devices. In addition, new non-
volatile memory technologies have been explored for faster and denser 
alternatives to conventional Random Access Memories. Moreover, technologies 
such as Flexible Electronics have emerged as a potential candidate for large area 
and low cost options for hybrid integration of flexible components.  
 
To train the students in this specialization and cover the essential fundamentals, 
three core components have been chosen: Quantum Nano-electronics, Flexible 

Nano and and Printed electronics, & Emerging Devices including alternate transistor 
6 Flexible structures and new non-volatile memory devices. These will provide 

Electronics fundamental understanding of new generation nanoelectronics, related 
processing, and characterization. The electives will help in shaping the ability of 
the students to think creatively, provide an in depth cognition and expose them 
to deliver towards direct applications and also to undertake industry relevant 
research. A combination of nano and flexible electronics will prepare students 
for new age challenges such as cost, power, and wider suitability for various 
applications.  
 

Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Introduction to Spintronics (3-0-0) Nano Sensors 
Flexible and Printed Electronics (3-0-0) Quantum Nano-Electronics 
Advanced Compact Modeling (2-0-0)  Non-Volatile Memory Technologies 

17 
 



Semiconductor Optoelectronics 
Organic Optoelectronics 
Specialization Project 0-0-12  

Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) is a combination of artificial intelligence 
(AI) technologies with the internet of things (IoT) infrastructure to achieve more 
efficient IoT operations by enhancing data management and analytics. This is 
transformational and mutually beneficial for both technologies as AI improves 
data analytics and decision making capabilities through machine learning and 
IoT adds value through better connectivity, signalling and data exchange. 
 
The specialization in AIoT is designed to impart knowledge in a wide variety of 
fields such as IoT, communications, VLSI, computing, AI and ML. Design of IoT 
system architecture, its components and applications along with machine 
learning and AI algorithms is covered through courses such as Introduction to 
IoT and Artificial Intelligence. Industry relevant circuit design practices are 
included in courses such as Analog and Interfacing Circuits and Digital and SoC 

Artificial 
Design. The program also features hands-on implementation of IoT systems 

Intelligence of 
through labs and tutorials. 

7 Things (AIoT) 
 Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(EE, CS and AI) (8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Embedded Systems 
Microsystems Fabrication Technology 
Sensors and Measurements   
Deep Learning  

Artificial Intelligence / Advanced 
Advanced Machine Learning 

Machine Learning (3-0-0) 
Advanced Artificial Intelligence 

Introduction to IoT (1-0-0) 
Edge and Fog Computing   

Digital and SoC Design (3-0-0) 
Neuromorphic Computing and Design   

SIoT lab (0-0-2) 
Analog and Interfacing Circuits   
Data Communication and Networking   
Resource Constrained AI   
Specialization Project 0-0-12 

In the current era of Internet-of-Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 5G 
Circuits, there are multiple prototypes being proposed and demonstrated these 
days for smart and real-time applications. To support this, high-speed 
circuits/systems are required which should be able to handle high bandwidth 
requirements of these applications. Over the decades, Very Large Scale 
Integration (VLSI) technologies have been a robust way to implement the 
required functionality through digital systems implementation and make it very 
easy for the designers at different abstraction levels to transfer the intellectual 
properties. For meeting timing and power requirements in these systems, 
various aspects of application-specific integrated implementation of digital and 

VLSI  Systems analog circuits/systems is required. 
8   

(EE and CS) This program aims to provide the students an exposure by making them 
understand the functioning, designing and testing of VLSI Circuits and System 
as well as their performance assessment criteria. The program includes a variety 
of detailed courses on Analog Circuits, Digital Circuits, Mixed-Signal Circuits, 
Synthesis, Verification and Testing. These courses address state-of-the art 
design methodologies as well as current trends in the industry such as high-
speed design issues and techniques.  
 

Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

18 
 



Digital and SoC Design  
Fundamentals of Signal and Power 

Hardware Design for Artificial Integrity  
Intelligence 3-0-0 Image Sensor Design and Applications  
Formal Verification 2-0-0 Neuromorphic Computing and Design  
Advanced VLSI Design and Lab 2-0- VLSI Broadband Communication 
2 Circuits 
 VLSI Testing 

Hardware Software Co-Design  
Specialization Project 0-0-12 

Society’s ability to utilize more renewable energy like wind and solar power is 
limited by the fact that our existing energy architecture was designed a century 
ago. The current system relies on large, centrally controlled power plants with 
predictable outputs. But wind and solar power fluctuates with environmental 
conditions, are difficult to control, and the power they generate requires 
conversion. Adapting the existing grid to operate reliably with renewable 
energy sources is a complex task. A new architecture for power distribution, 
called the smart grid, is required to accommodate renewable energy. 
New technologies can have transformative impacts on remote communities that 
are not served by traditional power grids. Power distribution challenges are 
faced all over the world and the students should have an opportunity to receive 
training in advances in smart grid technology. 
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Smart Grid 
9 Power System Protection 3-0-0 

 
Power System Dynamics and 
Control 3-0-0 
HVDC & FACTS 3-0-0 
Power Systems Restructuring 3-
0-0 
Power Quality Mitigation 

Introduction to Smart Grid 3-0-0 
Techniques 3-0-0 

Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 
Plugin Electric Vehicles 3-0-2 

Power Quality 2-0-0 
Power System Reliability and 
Security 3-0-0 
Selected Topics in Distributed 
Generation 3-0-0 
Introduction to Cyber-Physical 
Systems 3-0-0Specialization 
Project 0-0-6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

19 
 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. inElectrical  Engineering  (Regular) 
 

Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP C N G
H C C 

 I Semester   II Semester   

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 
Electrical Mechanics 
Engineering 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computer Science 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Bioengineering 

      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 
      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering Design 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

I  Design II  
NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Skill I  Skill II  
NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0. - 

responsibilities I and 5 
responsibilities 
II 

NH Performing Arts I 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0. - 
/Sports I  II/Sports II 5 

Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 Total 11-2-12 2 3 1
5 6 

 III Semester  IV Semester 

IE Materials Science & 3 ×  3 - 3 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Engineering  1-0-0   Recognition and 
Fractal 1 – Energy Machine 
Materials Learning 
Fractal 2 – 
Magnetic Materials 
F3 – Computational 
Material Design 

IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4       
Systems 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4  PC Circuit Theory 3-0-0 3 - 3 

LS                 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Engineering 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Probability,  Electromagnetic
Statistics and  s 
Stochastic 
Processes 

LS Foundations of 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Design 2-0-2 4  3 
Quantum 
Information 
Processing 

20 
 



PC Data Structure and 3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Physical 3-0-0 3  3 
Algorithms Electronics 

NE Intro. To Profession  0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
            

Total 18-3-4 25 1 22 Total 17-0-4 2 - 1
1 9 

 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC Analog Circuits 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 PC Power 3-0-3 6 - 4.

Engineering 5 
PC Electrical Machines 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Signal 2-0-0 3 - 2 

Processing 
PC Communication 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Data 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Systems Communication 
Networks 

PC Computer 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Embedded 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Architecture Systems 

PC Control Systems  3-0-3 6 - 4.5 PC Communication 0-0-3 3 - 1.
Systems Lab 5 

      PC Digital Systems 0-0-3 3 - 1.
Lab 5 

      PC Electrical 0-0-3 3 - 1.
Machines Lab 5 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Program/Open 3-0-0 3  3 
Elective 

NH Professional Ethics 0-1-0  1 - NH Professional 0-0-2 2 1 - 
I Ethics II 

Total 18-1-6 24 1 21 Total 15-0-14 2 1 2
9 1 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 
PE                - - - 9 PE Programme/Op - - - 1
/ Programme/Open / en Electives 4 

OE Electives OE 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       
IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Science 
Total 15-0-6 - - 17 Total 17-0-0 - - 1

7 
Total of Graded Credit - 1

5
0 

Total of Non-Graded Credit  9 - 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total 165 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 



14. Detailed Program Compulsory Course Contents 
 

Title Physical Electronics Number EEL2XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. EE Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Quantum Mechanics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background knowledge of basic semiconductor and semiconductor component physics and to use 

relevant theoretical models for calculating properties and performance of semiconductor materials and 
components.  

2. Make students familiar with handling characterization of semiconductor components and circuits. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Describe the crystal structure and electronic band structure of the most common semiconductor materials, 

along with calculation of properties of semiconductors and charge transport. 
2. Explain the physics of p-n junction, the function and transport characteristics of the p-n diode, the bipolar 

transistor and the MOSFET transistor 
3. Describe metal-semiconductor junctions and semiconductor hetereojunctions and their application in 

electronic components 
 
Contents  
Foundation [8 Lectures]: 
Crystal structure, Review of quantum mechanics (3 L); 
Electrons in periodic lattices, E-k diagrams, Electrons, holes and phonons. Effective mass, intrinsic & extrinsic 
semiconductors, free carrier and carrier concentration and Fermi-level (5 L). 
Charge Transport [4 Lectures]: Scattering and Drift, Mobility, Hall Effect, excess carriers. Surface recombination, 
electrostatic field and built-in electric field. 
PN junction [7 Lectures]: 
Electrostatics, equilibrium and depletion approximation. Reverse bias transition capacitance, breakdown in PN 
junctions (4L) 
PN junction under forward bias, minority carrier injection, DC current-voltage characteristics, Temperature 
effect (3L) 
Non-ideal diodes [5 Lectures]:Tunneling diodes, AC Analysis, charge storage and transient characteristics; 
Schottky barrier diodes,Ohmic contacts, Heterojunctions. 
Bipolar transistors [8 Lectures]: 
Derivation of I-V and current gain expressions, Equivalent circuits, Frequency response. (4 L); 
pnpn structures, Silicon controlled rectifier, thyristor, Gate turn-off thyristor, Insulated-Gate bipolar transistor 
(4 L). 
MOS Structure and Transistors [10 Lectures]: 
MOS capacitors, Flatband and threshold voltages (3 L);  
Static MOS transistor, I-V Characteristics, MOS transistor equivalent circuit, cutoff frequency (4 L); 
Body effect, Short Channel Devices, basic CMOS fabrication (3 L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Neamen, D. Biswas, D., (2017), Semiconductor Physics and Devices, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill  
2. Streetman, B. G., Banerjee S. K., (2015), Solid State Electronic Devices, 7th Edition, Pearson Education India 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Solid State Devices, NPTEL Course, Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute 
of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106091/  

 
 
 
 

22 
 



Title Circuit Theory Number EEL2XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. EE Type Foundation course 
Prerequisite Signals and Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Teach the fundamentals of circuit elements and analyses. 
2. Teach the time and frequency domain analyses of circuits.  
3. Discuss the stability of a network. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Solve different electric circuit problems in time and frequency domain.  
2. Analyze various two port networks and their stabilities. 
 
Contents   
Review of fundamental circuit elements, sources, and theorems [4 Lectures]: Properties of resistor, capacitor, inductor, 
and various sources. Discussion and problem solving  on KVL, KCL, maximum power transfer theorem, 
compensation theorem, Thevenin and Norton theorems, Millman's theorem, Miller effect, Tellegen's theorem,  
graph theory approach of circuit analysis.    
Three phase systems [4 Lectures]:Three phase voltage and current, star-delta connections, line-to-line and phase 
quantities, balanced and unbalanced circuits and power measurements.  
Two port network analysis and synthesis [6 Lectures]:  
Representation of two port networks in terms of impedance (Z) and admittance (Y) parameters, Transmission 
(ABCD) parameters, Hybrid (h) parameters, g-parameters, Scattering (S) parameters and their suitable 
applications (4L) 
Idea of reciprocal and symmetric networks. Equivalent network parameters of series and parallel connections 
of networks (2L) 
Analyses and synthesis of R-L-C networks [8 Lectures]:  
Analyses of R-L, L-C, R-C circuits under DC and AC excitations. Finding out initial conditions and the solution 
of differential equations associated with RLC circuits in time domain (4L) 
Network functions, Foster and Cauer synthesis, Helmholtz delay concept. (2L) 
Series and parallel resonances, Q-factors, selectivity (2L) 
 
Frequency domain analyses [8 Lectures]:  
Idea of complex frequency and s-domain. Time domain to frequency domain transformation (4L) 
Applications of Laplace and Fourier transforms in electric circuits. Poles and zeros of a network, Bode plot, 
stability analyses (4L) 
Filter synthesis [6 Lectures]:  
Filter definitions and specifications, basic L-C filter, lattice structure (2L) 
m-derived filter, Butterworth and Chebyshev filters, active filter(4L)   
 
N.B.  A total of six more class sessions will be included to solve numerical problems. 
 
Textbook  
1. V. Valkenberg, (2007), "Network Analysis," Prentice Hall International Edition 
2. D. Chattopadhyay and P.C. Rakshit, (2000), "Fundamentals of Electric Circuit Theory," S. Chand & Company 
3. C.K. Alexander and M.N.O. Sadiku, (2003) "Fundamentals of Electric Circuits," McGraw Hill. 
4. E. A. Guillemin, (1953) "Introductory Circuit Theory," John Wiley and Sons 

 
Self Learning Material  
1. MIT open course on "Circuits and Electronics," https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-

computer-science/6-002-circuits-and-electronics-spring-2007/.     
 
 
 

23 
 



Title Engineering Electromagnetics Number EEL2XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electromagnetism and Optics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize behavior of Electromagnetic wave propagation in different medium and its application to solving 

practical electromagnetic fields problems  
2. Provide basic understanding about transmission line and radiating systems for solving engineering 

electromagnetic problems 
3. Provide basic understanding of wave propagation used in practical wireless propagation systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Formulate and analyse problems involving lossy media with planar boundaries using uniform plane 

waves.  
2. Solve engineering problems involving transmission lines, metallic/dielectric waveguides.  
3. Obtain basic understanding of different radiating systems and be able to use these in the design of 

rudimentary wireless communications systems 
 
Contents  
Review of Maxwell’s equations [4 Lectures]: Review of Maxwell’s Equation, time-harmonic fields, scalar and vector 
potentials, boundary conditions, Uniform plane wave 
Plane waves at boundaries [5 Lectures]:Plane wave reflection and refraction at boundaries: Normal and oblique 
incidence, Brewster angle  
Plane waves in dispersive media [5 Lectures]:quarter wave matching, wave propagation in dispersive media  
Transmission Lines theory [5 Lectures]: Transmission line parameters and equations, Input impedance, standing 
wave ratio and power 
Transmission Lines application [5 Lectures]: Smith chart, Impedance matching, Applications of transmission lines, 
Transient on transmission lines  
Guided wave [5 Lectures]: TE, TM and TEM waves, parallel-plate waveguide  
Waveguides [5 Lectures]: rectangular and cylindrical waveguides, waveguide resonators, dielectric guides 
Antennas [8 Lectures]:  
Hertzian dipole, half-wave dipole and quarter-wave monopole antennas, small loop antenna, antenna 
characteristics and arrays(5L) 
Wave propagation: Ground wave propagation, ionospheric propagation (3L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Hayt, W. H. & Buck, J. A.,(2015), Engineering Electromagnetics, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill  
2. Sadiku, M. N. O., (2015), Principles of Electromagnetics, 6th edition, Oxford University Press 
3. David K. Cheng, (1989), Fields and Waves Electromagnetics, 2nd edition, Pearson Education   
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Kumar P., Electromagnetic Theory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104087/# 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Electromagnetics and Applications, Department of Electrical engineering and Computer Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT OpenCourseWare,https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-fall-2005/ 
  

 
 
 
 

24 
 



Title Digital Design Number EELXXX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the fundamental concepts in digital logic and system design. 
2. Emphasize the modern design methodology to enable design practices using CAD tools. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to have the ability to Design and implement simple digital systems on FPGA 

boards.  
 
Contents  
Digital Logic Families, Voltage levels, Noise Margin, Power Dissipation, Fan-In, Fan-Out, CMOS Logic [3 lectures] 
Introduction to HDL, Design flow, Number representation, Arithmetic circuits: Fast Adders, Multipliers. [5 lectures] 
Gate delays, Transient output.[2 lectures] 
Multiplexers, Encoders, Decoders, Code Converters [5 lectures] 
Design and Analysis of Synchronous circuits, Memory Element in HDL, Counters and Shift Registers.[5 lectures] 
State Diagram, State Table, State Assignment and Reduction, Design of Finite State Machines (Melay and Moore), 
Timing analysis [5 lectures] 
Programmable Logic Devices: PLA, PAL, CPLD, FPGA. Implementation with FPGA. [3 lectures] 
 
Lab Experiments on Designing Arithmetic circuits, Universal Shift Registers, Frequency Divide and Timing 
circuits, ALU, UART, Serial Peripheral Interface, VGA, Control Applications: Vending Machine, Traffic Light 
Controllers, Game Circuits, Motor Control. 
 
Textbooks 
1. Brown S. and Vranesic Z., (2013), Fundamentals of Digital Logic with Verilog Design, McGraw-Hill, 3rd 

Edition. 
2. Unsalan C., Tar B., (2017), Digital System Design with FPGA: Implementation Using Verilog and VHDL, 

McGraw-Hill Education. 
3. Mano M.M.,  Ciletti M.D., (2018), Digital Design: With an Introduction to the Verilog HDL, VHDL and 

System Verilog, Pearson. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Roychoudhury, D., Digital Systems Design, Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Kharagpur https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/105/117105080/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 



Title Analog Circuits Number  

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with the concepts of analog circuits and give them a comprehensive overview of various 

amplifiers. 
2.  Deliver the knowledge of analog circuits by focusing on design and implementation. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement the concepts of CMOS Analog Design on real world problems and applications. 
2.  Design various analog circuits like single stage, differential amplifiers, operational amplifiers, filters for 

given specifications. 
 
Contents  
MOS Field-Effect Transistors: MOSFETs and its characteristics, operating modes [3 lectures] 
single stage amplifier, small signal equivalent circuits [5 lectures] 
Amplifier configurations [2 lectures] 
Concept of biasing, cascode and cascade amplifiers, current mirrors [5 lectures] 
Differential amplifiers: MOS differential pair, large and small signal analysis including common mode range 
and output swing, common mode rejection, passive and active loads [5 lectures] 
Frequency response of amplifiers: Fundamental concepts, High frequency model of transistors  
Frequency compensation, Miller’s theorem [5 lectures] 
Feedback: Negative feedback, Gain Desensitization, Bandwidth modification, Modification of I/O impedances, 
sense and Return techniques, Stability in feedback systems [5 lectures] 
Output Stages and Power Amplifiers: Basic stages, large signal considerations, class A, class B and class AB 
configurations, low drop out regulators [5 lectures] 
Operational Amplifiers: Op-Amp characteristics and specifications, concept of virtual ground [3 lectures] 
Inverting and non-inverting amplifiers, op-amp applications including voltage summer, integrator, 
differentiator, instrumentation amplifiers [4 lectures] 
 
Lab Experiments: It will include design and analysis of various analog circuits like single-stage amplifiers [3 
labs], differential amplifiers [2 labs], operational amplifiers and frequency compensation [3 labs], output 
stages [2 labs] for given specifications and applications. Students will be introduced with different circuit and 
design parameters like gain, bandwidth, ICMR, CMRR, PSRR, slew rate and others through DC, AC and 
transient analysis using SPICE simulations. It will also include implementation & characterisation of discrete 
off-the-shelf components using breadboard. 
 
Textbook  
1. Sedra, A. S., Smith, K. C., and Chandorkar, A. N., (2013), Microelectronic Circuits: 
International Version, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Razavi, B., (2016), Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill Education. 
3. Gray, P. R, Hurst, P. J., Lewis, S. H., and Meyer, R. G., (2020), Design of Analog Integrated Circuits: 5 th 
Edition, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Nagendra Krishnapura, Analog Integrated Circuit Design, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/11710603 

 
 
 
 
 

26 
 



Title Electrical Machines Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering,   

Circuit Theory 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of construction, principle of operation, performance, and control of various electrical 
machines used in the industry using power electronic converters 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze performance of different electrical machines 
2. Understand and develop converters and their control methodologies required for various electrical machines 

used in industry 
 
Contents  
Transformers [7 Lectures]:  
Three phase transformers- connections, testing, three winding transformers (5L)  
Auto transformers, tap-changing transformers (2L) 
Induction machines [12 Lectures]:  
Production of rotating magnetic field in three phase and two-phase ac machines-torque development- Types 
of IM-Equivalent circuit-Slip-torque characteristics (5L) 
Testing of 3-phase Induction motor -harmonic effects- Induction generator and its control (5L) 
Principle of operation of single phase induction motor and its equivalent circuit (2L)                                                                         
Synchronous machines [10 Lectures]:  
Principle-mathematical model of cylindrical and salient pole machines based on armature reaction (4L) 
Regulation, operation with infinite bus (4L)  
Synchronous motor- control (2L) 
DC motor control [4 Lectures]: AC-DC and DC-DC converter topologies and their applications in control of DC 
motors 
Induction machine control [9 Lectures]:  
DC-AC and AC-AC converter topologies (4L)  
Their applications in constant torque, constant power and slip power control of induction machine (5L) 
 
Textbook 
1.  Sen, P.C., (2007), Principles of Electric Machines and Power Electronics, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2.  Fitzgerald, A.E., Kingsley, C. Jr., Umans, S.D., (2003), Electrical Machinery, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill 
3.  Dubey, G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Bhuvaneswari, G.,  Electrical Machines, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Delhi 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102146/ 

2. Das,S.D., Fundamentals of Electric Drives, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104140/ 

3. Say, M.G., (1983), Alternating Current Machines, Pitman Publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 



Title Control Systems Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Signals and Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce Linear Time Invariant System. 
2. Teach design of linear feedback controller using time and frequency domain methods. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze linear control system and to understand effect of feedback. 
2. Design linear controllers.  
 
Contents 
Mathematical modeling of physical systems [8 Lectures]:  
State variable and Transfer function representations; Examples of modeling different types (e. g. Electrical, 
mechanical, chemical, biological, social etc.) systems [3L] 
Duality between the elements of different types of systems.  Linearity and linearization, Transfer function and 
its interpretation in terms of impulse and frequency responses, Block-diagram and signal flow graph 
manipulations [5L ] 
Characterization of systems [7 Lectures]:   
Time domain response for first order and second order systems; Damping ratio and natural frequency; Effect 
of dominant poles and zeros on system response; Concept of system Stability, Routh array, [4L] 
Frequency domain response of LTI system; peaking frequency, bandwidth; Link between time and frequency 
domain response indices.[3L] 
Analysis of Feedback [6 Lectures]:  
Sensitivity and complementary sensitivity function, Disturbance and noise reduction, [3L] 
Structured and unstructured plant uncertainties. Steady state errors and system types [3 Hours] 
Analysis of closed loop systems[13 Lectures]:  
Stabilityand relative stability [1L] 
Root-locus approach [5 L] 
Bode and Nyquist stability criterion [4L] 
PID and Lag-Lead Controller Design[3 L] 
State space modelling and state feedback control [8 Lectures]:  
State space modelling, [2L] 
Controllability and observability, [2L] 
State feedback and observer design [4L] 
 
Laboratory Classes (10-12 Classes) 
A few experiments will be conducted on simulation of different systems i.e. temperature control, power 
converter control using MATLAB as a tool. Experiments on servo position control, inverted pendulum, 
helicopter emulator system, Active suspension, Magnetic Levitation, coupled tank system.   
 
Textbooks  
1. Franklin, G.  F. ,  Powell, J.  D., and Emami-Naeini, A.  E.,(2002), Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems,  

Prentice Hall Inc.  
2. Nise, N., (2007), Control Systems Engineering, Wiley India 
3. Gopal, M., (2008),  Control Systems;  Tata McGraw Hill  

 
Self Learning Material  
1. Gopal, M.,  Control Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology  Delhi,   https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102043/ 
 
 
 

28 
 



Title Communication Systems Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. 3rd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Signals and Systems, Fundamentals of Probability   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to transmission and reception techniques for 
communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design basic communications systems 
1. Compare and contrast the strengths and weaknesses of various communication techniques  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Communication Systems [6 lectures]:  
Basic building blocks and quality of service requirements of communication systems [2L], 
Channel and noise modelling, power spectral density of noise, noise through LTI systems [4L]. 
Analog Modulation [4 lectures]:  
Need for modulation, Amplitude Modulation (AM), frequency division multiplexing, spectrum of AM [2L], 
Angle Modulation, spectrum of angle modulated signal [2L].  
Pulse Modulation [5 lectures]:  
The sampling theorem and time-division multiplexing [2L], 
Pulse modulation techniques, generation and detection of pulse modulation [3L]. 
Digital Transmission at Baseband [12 lectures]:  
Quantization, pulse code modulation, line codes, spectral characteristics of line codes [4L],  
Matched filter receiver, inter-symbol interference, eye-patterns [4L],  
Nyquist’s criterion for ISI free transmission, equalization and OFDM [4L]. 
Digital Transmission at Passband [15 lectures]:  
Binary digital modulation, QAM, signal constellation [4L],  
spectral characteristics of digital modulated signals [2L], 
digital receiver design - correlator receiver, optimal detectors [4L], 
bit error rate performance analysis over AWGN channels, power and bandwidth efficiency [5L] 
 
Textbook  
1. Haykin, S. and Moher, M. (2009), Communication Systems, 5th Edition, Wiley Press   
2. Lathi, B. P., Ding, Z., and Gupta, H. M. (2017), Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, 4th Edition, 

Oxford University Press 
3. Madhow, U., (2008), Fundamentals of Digital Communication, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Jagannatham, A.,  Principles of Communication Systems I and II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104091/ and https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104098/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 



Title Communication Systems Lab Number EEP3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3 [1.5] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with the generation and detection of analog modulated signals. 
2.  Expose students to end-to-end implementation of digital communication systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design, implement and test modulator and demodulator for different types of communication schemes. 
2.  Implement end-to-end digital communication systems over wireless links. 
 
Contents  
1. An introduction to measurement equipment like Signal Analyzer, AFG, Oscilloscope. 
2. Generation and detection of analog modulated signals. 
3. Study and implementation of phase locked loop. 
4. Generation and detection of pulse modulation schemes. 
5. Implementation of ISI channels and equalization. 
6. Generation and characterization of BPSK/QPSK modulated signals. 
7. Study and implementation of end-to-end communication system with digital modulation. (3) 
8. Demonstration of end-to-end optical communication systems (3) 
 
Textbook  
1. Haykin, S. and Moher, M. (2009), Communication Systems, 5th Edition, Wiley Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Lathi, B. P., Ding, Z., and Gupta, H. M. (2017), Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, 4th Edition, 

Oxford University Press 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 



Title Power Engineering Number EE3XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Engineering   

Electromagnetics 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of the functionalities of various components of the modern power system and 

their modelling 
2. Give exposure to modern power electronic converters to enhance the efficiency, economy, and controllability 

of the existing power system 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model and evaluate the performance of a power system 
2. Propose converter topologies and their control strategies for enhancing the power system performance 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Structure of the conventional and modern power systems, conventional and renewable 
energy sources, load curve  
Mechanical aspects of overhead transmission line [4 Lectures]: The catenary curve, sag, and tension  
Modeling and performance of transmission lines [10 Lectures]: 
Conductor types, inductance and capacitance calculations (5L) 
Various models of transmission line representation (2L) 
Voltage regulation and efficiency, power circle diagram, need for compensation to enhance the performance 
(3L) 
Representation and modeling of the power system [5 Lectures]: Single line diagram, substation layout, mathematical 
models of various components, impedance diagram, per-unit system, per-unit reactance diagram  
Underground cables [6 Lectures]: 
Construction, grading of cables, dielectric loss and charging effect (4L) 
Merits of underground cables, need of dc transmission (2L) 
Corona [4 Lectures]: Corona phenomena, critical disruptive voltage, corona loss, factors affecting corona loss  
Series and shunt compensation in transmission and distribution [5 Lectures]: Principle of series and shunt 
compensation, introduction to series and shunt compensation devices  
Integration of renewable energy sources [6 Lectures]: 
Principles of solar PV and wind energy conversion- concept of MPPT in SPV and WE (4L) 
Converter topologies for grid integration techniques for solar PV and WE (2L) 
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Substation layout; estimation of transmission line parameters; performance of transmission lines with various 
models; reactive power compensation in transmission; power factor correction; testing of cables; 
implementation of series compensation; implementation of shunt compensation 
 
Textbook 
1. Stevenson,W.D.Jr., (1982), Elements of Power System Analysis, McGraw Hill International 
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, New Age International Publishers 
3. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Wiley India 

Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Sinha,A.K.,  Power System Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur,     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105067/ 
2. Das, D., Power System Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105140/  
 
 

31 
 



Title Digital Signal Processing Number EEL3XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Signal and Systems   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of analysis and synthesis of algorithms and systems that process discrete 
time signals, with emphasis on realization and implementation  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. interpret and process discrete/digital signal and systems 
2. analyze and provide solutions to practical implementation issues of DSP systems 

 
Contents  
Review of Discrete Time signals: Sequences, Discrete time processing of continuous time signals, Practical 
Sampling and reconstruction, sampling of band-pass signals; Discrete systems: attributes, DTFT, z-transform, 
Inverse systems (3 lectures) 
Computation of the Discrete Fourier transform (9 lectures): 
The discrete Fourier transform (DFT), Sampling of the discrete time Fourier transform, properties of the DFT, 
linear convolution using the DFT (5 lectures) 
Fourier analysis of the signals using the DFT, Direct computation of the DFT, Decimation-in-time FFT 
algorithms, Decimation-in-frequency FFT algorithm (4 lectures) 
Design of FIR filters (8 lectures): 
FIR filters with linear phase (2 lectures) 
Design of FIR filters by windowing (2 lectures) 
Park-McClellan’s method, Direct and Cascade form structures for FIR filters (4 lectures) 
Design of IIR filters (14 lectures): 
Introduction to IIR filter design, Design of continuous time low pass filters (3 lectures) 
Transformation of continuous time filters to discrete time filters (3 lectures) 
Design examples for low pass IIR filters, Frequency transformations of low pass filters. (5 lectures) 
Cascade, Parallel, Cascade-Parallel and Lattice structures for IIR filters (3 lectures) 
Multirate signal processing (5 lectures):  
Sampling rate conversion, implementation of Multirate systems, filter design for Multirate systems (2 
lectures) 
Noble identities, Type I & II polyphase representation, concept of Perfect Reconstruction Filter Banks 
(PRFB)  (3 lectures) 
Finite wordlength effects: Number representation, quantization of filter coefficients, Effects of finite 
wordlength on digital filters. (3 lectures) 
 
Reference Books  
1. Proakis, J. G. and Manolakis, D.G. (2007) Digital Signal Processing, 4th Edition Prentice Hall  
2. Mitra, S. K., (2008) Digital Signal Processing, 3nd Edition, McGraw Hill  
3. Manolakis, D.G., and Ingle, V. (2011) Applied Digital Signal Processing, 1st Edition, Cambridge University 

Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Basu, T. K., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105055/ 
2. Dutta Roy, S. C., Digital Signal Processing, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 

Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 

 

32 
 



Title Data Communication Networks Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the network protocols and architectures  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model data networks and analyze their performance  
2. Understand the issues and design the next-generation data networks 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 lectures]: Introduction to data communication, layered architecture. 
Data Link Control [8 lectures]: 
Measure of information, entropy, source coding [3L], 
Error detection: linear block code examples, cyclic redundancy check [3L],  
Retransmission strategies: ARQ protocols, framing [2L]. 
Delay models in Data Networks [8 lectures]:  
Introduction to Queueing theory, Little’s theorem, different queueing systems [4L], 
Priority queueing, Burke’s theorem, network of queues [4L]. 
Multi-access Communication [10 lectures]:  
Random access techniques, tree algorithms [4L]  
FDMA, TDMA, CDMA [4L] 
Reservation, polling, token ring and buses, High speed LANs [2L] 
Circuit Switching and packet switching [3 lectures]: Circuit-switched networks, packet switching principles, 
introduction to switch architecture, high speed switch scheduling 
Routing in Data Networks [6 lectures]:  
Spanning trees, shortest path routing [3L]  
Broadcast routing, optimal routing [3L] 
Flow and congestion control [2 lectures]: Window/Credit Schemes, Rate based schemes. 
TCP/IP and ATM [3 lectures]: TCP operation, TCP error, flow and congestion control, ATM reference 
architecture, transmission of ATM cells, ATM adaptation layer, traffic and congestion control. 
 
Textbook  
1. Bertsekas, D. P. and Gallager, R. G., (1992), Data Networks, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
2. Stallings, W., (2007), Data and Computer Communications, 8th Edition, Pearson 
3. Forouzan, B. A., (2007), Data Communication and Networking, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill 
 
Reference Book 
1. Tanenbaum, A.S. and Wetheral, D.J.  (2011), Computer Networks, 5th Edition, Pearson 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Modiano, E.,  Data Communication Networks, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer 

Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 

2. Pal, A.,  Data Communication, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105082/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 



Title Embedded Systems Number EEL3XX 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech. Type Core 

Prerequisite Basics of Computer Architecture   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce concepts of different architectures and programming languages of embedded processors.  
2. Introduce concepts of Real time system and design of embedded systems.   
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Program and to design embedded system using embedded processors based on system specifications.  
2. Use different IDE and debugging tools.    
 
Contents  
Architecture of ARM Cortex M3 and Cortex A series processors; [5L] 
Introduction to Embedded Multicore Architecture; Multicore Processor Design Technique; Interconnection 
networks for Multicore Processors; [5L] 
Programmable Systems on Chip; Architecture of DSPs; Fixed and Floating point devices; Security at Hardware 
level [5L]   
Selection of DSP chips; Performance assessment of embedded processor [2L] 
Programming of Embedded processors using assembly and C; [5L] 
Models for program --data flow graphs; Programming of multicore processors; Assembly language 
programming of ARM Cortex M3;[4L]  
Hardware software co-design; [2L] 
Processes and real time operating systems; Multi-rate system;[2L]  
Real time scheduling algorithms e.g. RMA, EDF and their variants; [4 L] 
Energy efficient scheduling algorithms; Structure of Real Time operating system; Overhead of RTOS; [4L] 
Example of Real time operating systems e.g. real time Linux, Keil RTX Real-Time Operating System, 
programming of embedded processors with RTOS   [4L ] 
 
Text Books  
1. Wolf, M., (2014), High Performance embedded Computing: Applications in Cyber Physical Systems and 

Mobile Computing, Elsevier 
2. JoshephYiu, (2013), The definitive Guide to ARM Cortex M3 and M4 Processors, Elsevier. 
3. Buttazzo, G., (2011), “Hard Real-Time Computing Systems: Predictable Scheduling Algorithms and 

applications, Springer  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Chaudhury,S., Introduction to Embedded Computing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 

Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102045/# 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
1. Wolf, M., “Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computing System Design” Third Edition, 

Elsevier 2012.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 



Title Digital Systems Lab Number EEP3XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3  
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Architecture   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of hardware/software tools and interfacing of embedded processor 
2. Provide knowledge of programming of embedded Processor 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use IDEs for writing software for embedded processors. 
2. Design and test embedded systems for different application. 
 
Contents  
Experiments on Configuration of RTOS, booting sequence; evaluating scheduler responsiveness; using 
different peripherals like GPIO, Timers, I2C bus etc. Operating System for IoT devices; Platform for 
heterogenousIoT devices; Experiments on simulators of Computer Architecture. 
 
Textbook 
1. Xiao, P., (2018), Designing Embedded Systems and the Internet of Things (IoT) with the ARM®Mbed™, 

John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
2. Norris, D., (2018) Programming with STM32: Getting Started with the Nucleo Board and C/C++, 

McGraw Hill 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

  

35 
 



Title Electrical Machines Lab Number EEP3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3 [1.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electrical Machines   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide practical exposure on operation, testing and performance evaluation of various electrical machines 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Test, determine the parameters and evaluate the performance of various electrical machines 
 
Contents  
Laboratory Experiments 
Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted: 
Testing of transformers, parallel operation of transformers, load test of transformers, separation of losses, 
three phase connections, converter based three phase induction motor speed control, performance 
predetermination of induction motor, load test of induction motor, regulation of alternator, performance of 
alternator connected to infinite bus, slip test, parallel operation of induction generator with ac grid, speed 
control of DC motor using converters  
 
Textbook  
1. Say,M.G., (1983), Alternating Current Machines, Pitman Publishing 
2. Fitzgerald,A.E., Kingsley,C.Jr., Umans,S.D., (2003), Electrical Machinery, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill 
3. Dubey,G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 



15. Detailed Course Content of Programme Elective Courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Communications 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 



Title Information Theory and Coding Number EEL3XX0 
Department EE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Basics of Probability   
Objectives  
The Instructor will describe mathematical principles of communication that govern the compression and 
transmission of data and the design of efficient methods of doing so 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate the fundamental concepts of information theory such as entropy, mutual information, channel 

capacity 
2. Elaborate the principles of source coding and data transmission 
3. Apply information theoretic methods to communication systems 

 
Contents  
Mathematical definition of information and the study of its properties [8 Lectures]:  
Measure of information, entropy, entropy rate, relative entropy, differential entropy (4 Lectures) 
Jensen’s inequality, data processing inequality,  Fano’s inequality (4 Lectures) 
Source coding [4 Lectures]:  Efficient representation of message sources- AEP, Shannon-Fano-Elias, arithmetic 
coding.  
Communication channels and their capacity [7 Lectures]:   
Mutual information, information channel capacity (3 Lectures) 
Channel coding theorem (4 Lectures) 
Coding for reliable communication over noisy (Gaussian) channels. (5 Lectures) 
Gaussian multi-user communications [8 Lectures]:   
Parallel Gaussian channels (2 Lectures) 
Multiple access channels (3 Lectures)  
Broadcast channels (3 Lectures) 
Lossy source coding: approximate representation of message sources. (5 Lectures) 
Information Theory and statistics (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
Cover, T. M., and Thomas, J. A. , (2006), Elements of Information Theory, Wiley 
 
Reference Book 
1. Abramson, N., (1963), Information Theory and Coding, 1st Ed., McGraw-Hill Book Company Inc.   
2. C. E. Shannon, (1948), A Mathematical Theory of Communications, Bell System Technical Journal 
 
Self Learning Material  
Merchant, S. N.,  Information Theory and Coding, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101053/   
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 



Title Spread Spectrum Communications Number EEL4XX0 
Department EE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Present an analysis of the performance and design of spread-spectrum communication systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Perform analysis on the performance of spread spectrum modulation formats. 
2. Analyze the performance of spread spectrum systems in the presence of interference. 
3. Analyze the performance of spreading code acquisition and tracking systems. 
 
Contents  
Types of spread spectrum systems [7 Lectures]: direct sequence (2 Lectures), frequency hopping (2 Lectures),  
time hopping (2 Lectures),  chirp and hybrid methods, OFDM-SS (3 Lectures) 
Sequences for spread spectrum communication: features, properties and generation methods (5 lectures)  
Initial code acquisition: techniques and performance analysis (5 lectures) 
Code tracking: techniques and performance analysis (5 lectures) 
Analytical Performance of spread spectrum systems (5 lectures) 
Spread spectrum systems in jamming environments (5 lectures) 
Low probability of intercept methods (5 lectures) 
Spread spectrum and electronic counter measure (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Dixon, R. C., (2010), Spread spectrum Systems, Wiley 
2. Simon, M. K., Omura, J. K., Scholtz, R. A. and Levitt, B. K., (2002), Spread Spectrum Communications 

Handbook, McGraw Hill 
3. Torrieri, D., (2015), Principles of Spread Spectrum Communication Systems, Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
Sen, D.,  Spread Spectrum Communications and Jamming, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronic 
and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105136/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

39 
 



Title Optical Communication Systems Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Engineering Electromagnetics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to transmission and reception techniques for 
optical communication systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design basic optical communications systems 
2. Compare and contrast the features of various optical communication techniques  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Optical Communication Systems [2 lectures]:  
Basic building blocks, optical transmitters, optical receivers, optical amplifiers [2L]. 
Optical transmission system considerations [8 lectures]:  
Attenuation, dispersion, line coding schemes, eye pattern [4L]  
Noise effects, attenuation and dispersion limited link design, pulse on pedestal power penalty  [4L] 
Modulation and Detection Techniques [12 lectures]:  
Optical modulation techniques, Intensity Modulation/Direct Detection system, SIM [4L] 
Coherent Optical Systems, homodyne and heterodyne detection [3L] 
BER performance in coherent and non-coherent modulation schemes [5L] 
Optical modulators [8 lectures]:  
Electro-Optic and Acousto Optic [4L]  
Tunable optical filters (grating filters, micro-ring resonators) [4L] 
Channel Impairments [12 lectures]:  
Optical fiber considerations-Pulse broadening [2L]  
Free space effects-turbulence models, weather conditions viz. fog, haze, drizzle [3L] under-water 
impairments [2L]  
Performance analysis: BER analysis under channel impairments, link budget, channel capacity [5L]  
 
Textbook  
1. Keiser, G. (2017), Optical Fiber Communications, 5 th Edition, McGraw Hill 
2. Chadha, D. (2013), Terrestrial Wireless Optical Communications, 1 st Edition, McGraw Hill. 
3. Chen A. and Murphy, E. (2011), Broadband Optical Modulators: Science, Technology and Applications, 1 

st Edition, CRC Press. 
  
Self Learning Material  
Kumar, K. P.,  Fiber-Optic Communication Systems and Techniques, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104113/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

40 
 



Title Satellite Communications  Number EEL4XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Data Communication   

Networks 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an overall understanding of satellite communication systems, technologies and techniques and will 
equip them with the design tools for communication payload design. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Explain the structure, techniques and technology for satellite communication systems. 
2.  Design and plan satellite communication links for a prescribed quality of service. 
 
Contents  
Introduction of satellite systems [11 Lectures]:    
Services, frequency planning, space segment components, earth stations (5L) 
Bus and payloads, antennas and coverage (3L)  
Transparent and non-transparent transponders (3L) 
Satellite Systems Planning [16 Lectures]:    
Free space loss, EIRP, noise sources, noise temperature, sky noise G/T ratio (5L) 
C/N calculation for uplink and downlink (2L) 
Modulation, Demodulation and BER Analysis for APSK, OQPSK, CPFSK (5L)  
Intermodulation, back-off, interference and C/I calculation (4L)  
Multiple Access in Satellite systems [7 Lectures]:    
Fixed and demand assignment, traffic matrices mapping (3L)  
FDMA & TDMA operation, MF TDMA operation (4L)  
Satellite system Future Trends [8 Lectures]:    
Standards issues and technology developments: BSM, DVB-S2, Satellite UMTS (5L)  
A state-of-the art update on current innovations and new systems proposals: Hybrid Satellite-Terrestrial 
Communications (3L) 

 
Textbook  
1. Maral, G., Sun, Z., and Bousquet, M., (2009), Satellite Communications Systems: Systems, Techniques 

and Technology, Wiley & Sons 
2. Roddy, D., (2017), Satellite Communications, McGraw Hill Education 
3. Pratt, T., Bostian, C. W., and Allnutt, J., (2003), Satellite Communications, John Wiley & Sons  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Bandyopadhyay, K.,  Satellite Communication Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronic 

and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105131/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 



Title Cellular Communication Networks  Number EEL4XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Data Communication   

Networks 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of fundamental issues related to frequency planning, resource allocation and 

interference management techniques in cellular communication networks. 
2. Introduce concepts and techniques used in existing and emerging cellular communication systems.    
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design operational cellular communications networks. 
2. Compare and contrast the strengths and weaknesses of various cellular communication networks. 
 
Contents   
Introduction of cellular systems[9 Lectures]:  
Channel models and impairments (5L) 
Quality of service requirements, coverage planning (4L) 
Interference management techniques[12 Lectures]:  
Interference avoidance and interference cancellation(5L) 
Interference alignment (4L) 
Interference coordination – network MIMO  (3L) 
User and Resource Management [9 Lectures]:  
Association and handover management (4L) 
Transmit power control (5L) 
Emerging Cellular Network Technologies[12 Lectures]:  
Long Term Evolution (4L) 
Long Term Evolution Advanced (3L) 
5G technologies and beyond(5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Miao, G., Zander, J., Sung, K., & Ben Slimane, S., (2016), Fundamentals of Mobile Data Networks, 

Cambridge University Press 
2. Rappaport, T. S., (2010), Wireless Communications – Principles and Practice, Pearson 
3. Bolcskei, H., Gesbert, D., Papadis, C. B., and Veen, A. V., (2006), Space-time Wireless Systems, Cambridge 

Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Koilpillai, D.,  Introduction to Wireless and Cellular Communications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/106/106106167/ 

2. ETSI 5G Technologies https://www.etsi.org/technologies/5g 
 
 
 
  

42 
 



Title Microwave engineering Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Engineering Electromagnetics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide theoretical background to analyze microwave circuits and systems 
2.  Provide design principle of several commonly used microwave devices and sources 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Have basic understanding of different techniques related to microwave circuits and systems 
2.  Design basic microwave components and antennas 
 
Contents  
Transmission lines: Review of wave equation and transmission line [5 Lectures]: stripline, micro-stripline; slotline; 
coplanar waveguide line; Wave propagation in planar lines: design, effective dielectric constant, attenuation, 
dispersion, power-handling capability  
Impedance matching [3 Lectures]: Design of distributed circuits using planar lines, single and double stub 
matching, LC and multisection impedance matching network 
Network analysis [5 Lectures]: scattering-matrix, representation, properties, shift in reference planes, 
generalized S-matrix; Signal flow graph; basics of network analyzer 
Passive components [5 Lectures]: power splitters/combiners, directional couplers, Operation and S-matrices of 
resonators/cavities 
Non-reciprocal components[3 Lectures]:  isolators and circulators 
Microwave filters [5 Lectures]: image parameter method; insertion loss method low pass filter prototype of 
Butterworth & Chebyshev response; filter transformation - impedance and frequency scaling, filter 
implementation - Richards transformation, Kuroda identities 
Microwave Antennas [5 Lectures]: Planar dipole and monopole antenna, folded dipole, Microstrip antenna, 
introduction to slot antenna  
Microwave broadband Antennas [3 Lectures]: Yagi-uda antenna, log-periodic antenna, helical antenna, biconical 
antenna, introduction to reflector antenna  
Microwave solid state devices [4 Lectures]: RF diodes and transistors, IMPATT, Schottky, PIN diodes, HEMT 
Device  
Microwave sources [4 Lectures]:  Gunn Diode, klystron, magnetron  
 
Textbook  
1. D. M. Pozar, (2011), "Microwave Engineering," 4th ed. New York, NY, USA, Wiley 
2. David K. Cheng, (1989), Fields and Waves Electromagnetics, 2nd edition, Pearson Education   
3. Balanis C. A., (2016), Antenna Theory, Analysis and Design, 4th edition, Wiley Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Kumar, G.,  Microwave Theory and Techniques, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 

Technology Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101112/ 
2. Vedio Lecture: Antenna Engineering, Dr. Anthony Ferraro, Penn State Univ., 

USA,http://www.engr.psu.edu/cde/courses/ee438/index.htm 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Electromagnetics and Applications, Department of Electrical engineering and Computer Science, 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-fall-2005/ 

 
 
 
 

 

43 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Signal Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

44 
 



Title Signal Compression Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Signal and Systems, Probability and Statistics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide background in fundamental signal compression techniques such as lossless and lossy 
techniques for different types of signals. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. compress various type of signals such as audio and image  
2. analyze the trade-off between compression, computational or implementational demand and quality of 

reconstructed signal.   
 
Contents  
Introduction to Signal Compression [5 Lectures]: Information and Entropy, Distortion Measures such as 
PSNR, mutual-information, divergence, and Kullback-Liebler number 
Lossless and Lossy Coding [9 Lectures]: Huffman Coding, Arithmetic Coding, adaptive and predictive 
lossless coding (5 Lectures) 
Subband Coding, QMF bank. (4 Lectures) 
Quantization [7 Lectures]: Uniform and non-uniform Quantization, Vector Quantization, Structured Vector 
Quantization, Product Vector Quantization (4 Lectures) 
Differential Coding, Delta Modulation. (3 Lectures) 
Transform Coding [7 Lectures]:  
Wavelets, Multi Resolution Analysis (4 Lectures) 
Compression using DCT, DWT, KLT (3 Lectures)  
Representation Based Techniques [6 Lectures]: Sparse Representation, Dictionary Learning Based 
Approaches (4 Lectures) 
Machine Learning based Compression (2 Lectures) 
Compression Standards [8 Lectures]:  
JPEG, JPEG 2000 (4 Lectures) 
H264, MPEG. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Sayood, Khalid, (2017). Introduction to data compression. Morgan Kaufmann. 
2. Gersho, Allen, and Robert M. Gray, (2012). Vector quantization and signal compression. Vol. 159. Springer 

Science & Business Media. 
3. Salomon, David, and Giovanni Motta (2010). Handbook of data compression. Springer Science & Business 

Media. 
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Ajit Rajwade, Digital Image Processing, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Bombay, https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~ajitvr/CS663_Fall2018/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material:   
Prof. S.C. Dutta Roy, Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 



Title Speech Processing Number EEL4xxx 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Program 

Elective  
Prerequisite Signal and Systems, Probability and Stochastic   

Processes 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce the theory of signal processing applications on speech, to give information about human speech 

production and perception, voice production mechanism, and human perception systems. 
2. provide an understanding of time frequency analysis of speech, Linear Prediction, speech 

analysis/synthesis. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. analyze digital signals, e.g., audio signals, in the time, frequency and joint time-frequency domains 
2. implement widely-used algorithms for speech analysis and speech processing in the frequency or 

time domain.  
 

Contents 
Introduction [6 Lectures]: Review of DSP basics, Filters, DFT, Short-time Fourier Transform, Spectrograms, 
Speech Production, Articulatory and Acoustic Phonetics 
Time Domain Analysis [16 Lectures]:  
Introduction to time series, probability models for time series, stationarity (5 Lectures)  
Moving average (MA), Autoregressive (AR), ARMA and ARIMA models, Estimating the autocorrelation 
function and fitting ARIMA models. (6 Lectures) 
Linear Prediction, Perceptually Based Linear Predictive Analysis, DPCM (5 Lectures)   
Cepstral Analysis [6 Lectures]: Time and frequency domain features, Cepstral Analysis, Mel Cepstral 
Analysis,  MFCC, Wavelets. 
Hearing Perception [4 Lectures] 
Applications [10 Lectures]: 
Compression, Recognition, Noise Suppression (5 Lectures) 
Music Event Classification, speech generation. (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2011), Theory and Applications of Speech Processing, Pearson. 
2. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2007), Introduction to Digital speech Processing, Publishers Inc. 
3. Gold, B., and Morgan, N., (2011), Speech and Audio Signal Processing, John Wiley. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Alan W Black, Speech Processing, Carnegie Mellon University, http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/15-
492/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. S.C. Dutta Roy, Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/ 

 
 
 
  

46 
 



 
Title System Identification Number EE4XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Signals and Systems,   

Basics of Probability  
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide students an understanding of system identification techniques and its applications.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to apply the learned techniques to solve practical problems such 
as echo cancellation, active noise cancellation, and deconvolution. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to System Identification [5 Lectures]: What is System Identification? How can we derive 
Algorithms? How do we evaluate the Algorithms? Stochastic vs. Non-stochastic Formulation.  
Nonparametric Identification [5 Lectures]: Impulse and Step Response, Correlation Methods, Spectral 
Analysis  
Parameter Estimation [12 Lectures]:  
Minimizing Prediction Error, Identifiability, Consistency, Biase (4 Lectures) 
Least Squares Relations between Minimizing the Prediction Error and the MLE, MAP  
(4 Lectures)  
Convergence and Consistency, Asymptotic Distribution of Parameter Estimates, The Instrumental-Variable 
Method (4 Lectures) 
Algorithms [8 Lectures]:  
Computing the Estimates, Recursive Estimation (5 Lectures) 
Kalman Filter Interpretation (3 Lectures) 
Identification in Practice [7 Lectures]:  
Aliasing due to Sampling, Closed Loop Data, Model Order Estimation (3 Lectures) 
Bounded but Unknown Disturbances, Identification in the Worst Case, Optimal Algorithms, Optimal Inputs, 
Robustness Consideration (4 Lectures) 
 
Applications [5 Lectures]: Echo Cancellation, Active Noise Cancellation, Deconvolution, Dehazing. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Ljung, Lennart (1998). System Identification: A Theory for the User. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 

Hall. 
2. Keesman, K. J. (2011). System identification: an introduction. Springer Science & Business Media. 
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Arun K.Tangirala , System Identification, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106149/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. V.M. Gadre, Signals and Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics and 
Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/101/117101055/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Control Engineering 
  

48 
 



Title Modern Control Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce time domain modeling of SISO and MIMO systems. 
2. Teach design of feedback controller using different time domain techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To analyze linear control system and to understand effect of feedback. 
2. To design controllers and Observers using different techniques for SISO and MIMO systems.  
 
Contents:  
Review of state space modeling technique, Solution of state space equation, State transition matrix; 
Linearization of nonlinear equations [4 Lectures] 
 
Discrete time system and difference equation representation of discrete time systems; solution of difference 
equation [4 Lectures] 
 
Vector spaces and Linear operators [6 Lectures]: Definition of linear operators; Operator Norms; Adjoint 
Operator; rotational operators 
 
Functions of Vectors and Metrices [6 Lectures]: Linear and multilinear functionals; quadratic forms; Bilinear 
forms as inner products; functions of matrices; Cayley Hamilton Theorem  
 
System Stability [5 Lectures]:Lypunov Stability; classification of Equilibria; Lypunov’s direct method; 
Relationship between different stability  
 
Controllability and Observability [4 Lectures]: PBH test for controllability; decomposing system into controllable 
and uncontrollable subspaces;  
 
Modal Controllability and Observability; Controllability and reahbility for discrete time systems; 
Observability and reconstructability [5 Lectures] 
 
State feedback and observer design [8 Lectures]:  
State feedback controller for SISO system; Multivariable canonical forms and state feedback controller design 
(4L) 
Reduced order and full order observer design (4L) 
 
Textbooks  
1. John Bay (2008), Fundamentals of Linear State Space Systems; McGraw Hill.    
2. Slotine, Jean-Jacques, and Weiping Li, (1991) Applied Nonlinear Control, Prentice-Hall. 
3. Brogan, William L(1991), Modern Control Theory, 3/e, Prentice-Hall, I991. 
   

  

49 
 



 
Title Nonlinear and Adaptive Control Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce nonlinear and adaptive control systems. 
2. Teach design and analysis of feedback controllers for nonlinear systems in the presence of uncertainties. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To analyze Nonlinear control systems. 
2. To design controllers and Observers in the presence of uncertainty.  
 
Contents:  
Introduction to Nonlinear Systems:  
Nonlinear models and nonlinear phenomena, Examples of nonlinear systems, [3 L] 
Concept of equilibrium points, Limit cycles [3 L]  
Small gain theorem, sector-based nonlinearities, Circle/Popov criteria [2 L] 
 
Stability Results:  
Lyapunov stability results, Barbalat's lemma, Krasovskii-LaSalle principle, Passivity theorems [7 L] 
Feedback linearization. [3 L] 
 
Reinforcement learning based control:  
Basics of Reinforcement learning technique, policy iteration, value iteration [3 L] 
Adaptive dynamic programming, Persistent Excitation. [4 L] 
Neural network, online adaptive dynamic programming, online policy and value iteration, actor-critic 
method. [5 lectures] 
 
Model predictive Control (MPC):  
Understanding MPC problem and advantages, Control and prediction horizon,  Controller design [5 L] 
Application of Adaptive Controller. [4 L]  
 
Textbooks   
1. Hassan K Khalil, (2002) Nonlinear systems, Prentice hall 
2. Kumpati S Narendra, Anuradha M Annaswamy, (2012), Stable adaptive systems, Courier Corporation 
3. Francesco Borrelli, Alberto Bemporad, Manfred Morari, (2017), Predictive control for linear and hybrid 

systems, Cambridge University Press 
 
Research Paper 
1. Frank L Lewis and DragunaVrabie, Reinforcement learning and adaptive dynamic programming for 

feedback control, IEEE circuits and systems magazine, 2009.  
 

  

50 
 



Title Robust and Optimal Control Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce various optimal and robust control techniques for feedback control systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To design and analyze feedback control systems in the presence of uncertainties. 
2. To design optimal controllers for linear and nonlinear systems.  
 
Contents 
Preliminaries 
Vector spaces and Linear operators, Review of state space modeling technique, Solution of state space 
equation, Euler-Lagrange equation [3 Lectures ] 
Controllability and Observability, State feedback controller, Observer.  [5 Lectures] 
 
Stability Results 
Optimal Control Theory: Lyapunov stability, Routh-Hurwitz criterion,  Nyquist criterion, Stabilizability 
and Detectability, [5 Lectures] 
 
Optimal Control Theory 
Principle of Optimality, Hamiltonian-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation, LQR, Kalman filter, Relation 
between LQR and Kalman filter. [5 Lectures] 
 
Robust control for Linear and Nonlinear Systems 
Uncertainty classifications, Matched and mismatched uncertainties, Uncertainty in input matrix [4 
Lectures] 
Optimal control approach for robust controller design, Stability analysis of uncertain systems.  [5 
Lectures] 
 
Kharitonov approach,  H2 and H∞ Control: Function space, Computation of H2 and H∞ norm [5 
Lectures]  
Kharitonov theorem, Robust Control problem formulations and design. [5 Lectures]  
 
Applications: Robust Active damping, Robust control of Robot Manipulator, Aircraft Hovering. [5 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks  
1. K. Zhou, J. C. Doyle and K. Glover, (1995), Robust and Optimal Control, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 

Cliffs 
2. Feng Lin,  (2007), Robust Control Design: An Optimal Control Approach,  Wiley    
3. S. P. Bhattacharyya, H. Chapellat, and L.H. Keel, (1995), Robust Control: The Parametric Approach. 

Prentice-Hall 
 
Relevant materials 
Robust Control Toolbox help file (in MATLAB).  
 

 
  

51 
 



Title Foundations of Cyber-Physical Systems Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize students with the concepts of Cyber-physical Systems (CPS).  
2. Deliver the knowledge of CPS by focusing design and implementation.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. This course provides the knowledge of principles of operation and performance of CPS.  
2. The student must be able to design and develop CPS for various industry applications. 
 
Contents:  
Introduction to Cyber-physical Systems [5 Lectures]: Basic principles of CPS; Industry 4.0, AutoSAR,  IIOT 
implications; Building Automation, Medical CPS 
 
CPS - Platform Components [5 Lectures]: CPS HW platforms - Processors, Sensors, Actuators; CPS Network - 
WirelessHart, CAN, Automotive Ethernet; Scheduling Real Time CPS tasks 
 
Modelling and Control of CPS [10 Lectures]:  
Synchronous and Asynchronous Model;  Principles of Dynamical Systems (5L)  
Hybrid Systems; Control and Sensing Techniques (5L) 
 
CPS - Computational Issues [10 Lectures]:  
Effect of scheduling, bus latency (5L) 
Sense and actuation faults on control performance, network congestion. (5L) 
 
Applications of CPS [4 Lectures]: Robot motion control; Autonomous Vehicle control; Smart Grid; Building 
Automation 
 
Secure Deployment of CPS [8 Lectures]:  
Threat model; Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks and deception attacks (3L) 
Attack detection, location and validation; Secure state estimator (5L) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Rajeev Alur, Principles of Cyber-Physical Systems, MIT Press, 2015.  
2. Edward A. Lee and Sanjit A. Seshia, Introduction to Embedded Systems, A Cyber-Physical Systems 

Approach Second Edition, MIT Press, ISBN 978-0-262-53381-2, 2017. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

52 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Devices and Circuits 
 

  

53 
 



Title VLSI Design Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Circuits, Basic understanding of electronics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Give overview of IC Technology and unit process 
2. Teach students the basics of digital circuit design methods.  
3. Provide the understanding of necessary concepts for digital VLSI design according to design rules decided 

by various technologies 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand designing and optimizing digital circuits with different quality metrics: cost,  speed, power 

dissipation, and reliability  
2.  Design the building blocks of digital systems  
 
Contents   
Introduction to VLSI Design, CMOS process sequence, fabrication and layout design rules [3 lectures] 
Technology Scaling, Effect of Process variations [2 lectures] 
Interconnect and wire models [2 lectures] 
CMOS Inverter, Static and Dynamic Behaviour, Propagation delay, noise margins, and power dissipation [4 
lectures] 
Static timing analysis, delay estimation using logical effort and Elmore delay [4 lectures] 
Designing combinational logic gates: Static CMOS design, Ratioed Logic, Pseudo NMOS, Pass Transistors 
Logic, design examples like multiplexers, decoders [4 lectures] 
Dynamic CMOS design, speed and power dissipation, choosing a logic style, design examples like clock 
generation circuits [3 lectures] 
Static Latches and Registers, Dynamic Latches and Registers, Alternative Register styles, pipelining, 
choosing a clock strategy [5 lectures] 
Timing Issues in Digital Circuits:  Timing classification, Synchronous Design, Synchronous timing basics, 
Skew and Jitter, clock distribution techniques [5 lectures] 
Memory Classification, Building Blocks, Memory core, Read only Memory, Read-write Memories, Memory 
peripheral circuitry [5 lectures] 
Decoders, Sense Amplifiers, Buffers, reliability, power dissipation, future trends validation and test [5 
lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Rabaey, J. M.,  Chandrakasan, A.,  Nikolic, B., (2011),  Digital integrated Circuits, A design perspective, 2nd 

Edition, PHI Learning 
2. Weste N. H. E., Harris D. M. (2009), CMOS VLSI Design, 4th Edition, Pearson 
3. Plummer J. D., Deal D. M., Griffin P. B., (2009) Silicon VLSI Technology- Fundamentals, Practice And 

Modelling, Pearson 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Chandorkar,A.N., VLSI Design, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/101/117101058/ 

2. Chandrakasan,A., MIT OpenCourseware, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-374-analysis-and-design- 
of-digital-integrated-circuits-fall-2003/ 

 
 
 
 
 

54 
 



Title Biosensors Number EE3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Electrical and  Bio Engineering   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the fundamentals of working principles of biosensors  
2. Describe the bio-specific interaction used for various applications 
3. Evaluate and compare techniques used in today’s time like electric, optical and mechanical 
4. Show and explain the examples of practical and real world biosensors  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the working mechanism of biosensors 
2. Understand the detailed characterization of biosensors in terms of specificity and selectivity 
3. Comprehend the functioning of commercial biosensors 
4. Create mechanisms for developing biosensors on their own by collaborating or working in an 

interdisciplinary group 
 
Contents   
Introduction to basics of sensors and biospecific interactions [8 Lectures]: 
Introduction to sensors and actuators, different components of biosensors, functionalization layers and their 
importance (4L) 
Biomolecules for biosensors, catalytic biosensors, affinity biosensors, biomolecular interaction (4L) 
Electrical and optical techniques for biosensing [8 Lectures]: 
Electrical - CV, ISFET (4L) 
Optical - Fluorescence, ELISA, SERS, SPR  (4L) 
Electrochemical, mechanical and advanced techniques for biosensing [11 Lectures]:  
Electrochemical (sub classifications like impedemetric, voltammetric, amperometric) (6L) 
Mechanical (Bio-MEMS), color based, microfluidics (including packaging), AI based biosensors(5L) 
Sensor key parameters and examples of commercially available biosensors [7 Lectures]: 
Sensitivity, selectivity, response- and recovery time, LOD etc. (4L) 
Industry standards and COTS bio-sensors and their functioning, need and relevance of biosensors in Indian 
context (3L) 
Readout Electronics[8 Lectures]: 
Basic circuitry to make readout electronics, Potentiostats, amperometric circuits, charge to voltage converter 
(4L) 
Variable gain amplifier, low noise amplifier, high resolution and low noise data converters, mismatch 
insensitive data converters (4L) 
 
Lab work: 
Biosensor material selection and characterization; Biochemical reagents and assays; Surface 
functionalization (Covalent/non-covalent) for Biosensing; Biosensor fabrication; Biosensor operation and 
signal generation; Biosensor sensitivity assay; Biosensor reproducibility; Biosensor Selectivity; 
Determination of limit of detection; Use of appropriate controls; Biosensor application on real samples. 
 
Textbook  
1. Yoon J.-Y., (2016),  Introduction to Biosensors, Springer 
2. Banica F.-G., (2012), Chemical Sensors and Biosensors: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley 
3. Rasooly A., Herold K. E., (2008), Biosensors and Biodetection, Humana Press, Science 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Materials for Biomedical Applications, MIT Open Courseware, 

https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-051j-materials-for-biomedical-
applications-spring-2006/lecture-notes/ 

 

55 
 



Title Biosensors Number EE3XX0 

Course Title CAD for VLSI Number EEL7XX0 
 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Pre-requisite VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of computer aided design aspects of design of integrated circuits. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about automating design cycle for VLSI Design. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of CAD for VLSI for digital designs. 
2. Implement the optimization algorithms for automated design of Analog circuits. 
 
Contents 
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Introduction to VLSI design methodologies and supporting CAD tool environment 
VLSI Design Automation [5 Lectures]: Overview of System C; Schematic editors; Layout editors; Module 
generators; Placement and routing tools; Behavioral, functional, logic and circuit simulators 
Algorithmic Techniques for Floor-planning [5 Lectures]: Algorithmic Techniques in VLSI CAD, Introduction of 
Floor planning, simulated annealing and mixed integer programming formulation 
Placement and Partitioning [4 Lectures]: Classical placement algorithms, Simultaneous level partitioning based 
PDP (Power Delay Product) 
Routing [3 Lectures]: General and Channel Routing, Global Routing, High-level power/current estimation. 
Optimization based Analog Design [4 Lectures]: Analog Circuit Design Challenges, Performance metrics and 
trade-offs, Deterministic and metaheuristic optimization based automated design flows at transistor level.  
Verilog-A [5 Lectures]: Introduction to Verilog-A, Basic functions and statements, User defined functions and 
systems tasks, Basic analog designs using Verilog-A. 
 
Lab Experiments on algorithmic level design implementation, basic floorplanning and routing, High-level 
power estimation algorithms, Automation of Analog Circuit Design, Complex analog circuit design using 
optimization techniques, Verilog-A programming. 
 
Text Books 
1. Gerez,S.H., Algorithms for VLSI Design Automation. Wiley, 1998. 
2. Sait,S.M., and Youssef,H., VLSI Physical Design Automation. World Scientific Publishing Company, 1999. 
3. Fakhfakh,M., Esteban,T.-C., Siarry,P., Computational Intelligence in Analog and Mixed-Signal (AMS) and 

Radio-Frequency (RF) Circuit Design. Springer 2015. 
4. Kundert,K.S., Zinke,O., The Designer’s Guide to Verilog-AMS. Springer, June 2004. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Kamakoti,V., and Balachandran,S., CAD for VLSI, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Computer 

Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,      
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106088/ 

2. Barros,M.F.M., Guilherme,J.M.C., Horta,N.C.G., Analog Circuits and Systems Optimization based on 
Evolutionary Computation Techniques. Springer, 2010. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 



Title Sensors and Actuators Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 4th Year Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Material Science and Engg., Semiconductor Devices,   

Analog circuits 
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Make the students know about different types of sensors and materials for sensors 
2. Use concepts for converting physical parameter into an electrical quantity 
3. Explain sensor parameters, different packaging types and readout circuitry 
4. Show and explain examples of sensors relevant to the industry 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
5. Identify the commercial and most used sensors in the industry 
6. Understand the underlying sensing phenomena used in sensors 
7. Develop a synthesis process and characterize a sensor on their own 
8. Test and examine the sensor functioning and comprehend as to what needs to be developed 
 
Contents   
Introduction to Sensors and Actuators [10 Lectures]:  
Different types of sensors, classification of transducers (6L) 
Structure of a transducer and types of transducers (Fluidic actuators, Piezoelectric and piezoresistive 
actuators etc.) (4L) 
Materials for sensors [6 Lectures]: Introduction to nanostructured materials, metal oxides, quantum dots, 2D 
materials 
Parameters and characteristics of Sensors and Transducers [6 Lectures]: Sensor parameters like sensitivity, 
selectivity, response- and recovery time, stability, ageing, repeatability, drift, calibration 
MEMS and transducers [6 Lectures]: MEMS structural elements, scaling advantages, transduction pathways, 
examples of electromechanical transduction 
Different packaging for Sensors [4 Lectures]: Premould packaging, Moulded interconnect devices, Hermetic 
packaging, Wafer level packaging  
Sensors readouts [5 Lectures]: Basic circuitry to read the data from sensors, Basic circuitry to read the data 
from sensors (noise, instrumentation amplifiers etc.) 
Current trends in Sensing applications [5 Lectures]: Few examples of current sensors used in the industry and 
commercial sensors will be discussed 
                                   
Textbook  
1. Silva C. W. de, (2016), Sensors and Actuators, CRC Press 
2. Zhang S., Li L., Kumar A., (2009), Materials Characterization Technique, CRC Press 
3. Eggins B. R., (2007), Chemical Sensors and Biosensors, Wiley 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Research articles such as ACS Nano Letters, IEEE Sensors, ACS Sensors, ACS Nano, Sensors & actuators B 
etc.  

  

57 
 



Title Physics and Modeling of MOS Transistor  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Physical Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth understanding of the modeling of semiconductor devices  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the operation and modeling of MOS transistor 
2. Develop models for novel semiconductor devices. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals [8 Lectures]: 
Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, fermi and quasi fermi-level, charge-density, electric field and potential 
(4 Lectures), Gauss’s law and Poisson’s equation, mobility and scattering mechanism, drift and diffusion (4 
Lectures)  
Two Terminal MOS Cap [10 Lectures]: 
 Flatband voltage, potential and charge balance, accumulation/depletion/inversion (5 Lectures) 
 Weak/moderate/strong inversion, high and low frequency capacitance (5 Lectures) 
MOS Transistors [15 Lectures]:  
Three terminal MOS transistor, body effect (5 Lectures) 
 Four terminal MOS transistor, effect of drain voltage, transport: mobility, series resistance, impact of doping, 
capacitance behavior (5 Lectures) 
Scaling, leakage current, impact ionization, short channel effects and optimization strategies (5 Lectures) 
Noise and Equivalent Circuit [6 Lectures]:  
Flicker, thermal and shot noise. Small signal equivalent circuit (3 Lectures) 
Non-linearity and harmonic distortion, Non-quasi static effect (3 Lectures) 
Nanoelectronics: Challenges and future prospective (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Y. Tsividis. Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor. Oxford University Press; 3rd edition, 2010. 
2. C. Hu, Modern Semiconductor Devices for Integrated Circuits. Pearson, 2009.  
3. D. Neamen, Semiconductor Physics And Devices. McGraw Hill Education; 4th edition, 2017. 
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Karmalkar, Semiconductor Device Modeling, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics & 
Communications Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/106/117106033/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Prof. Karmalkar course, Solid State Devices, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics & 
Communications Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/106/117106091/ 

  

58 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Computing Systems 
  

59 
 



Title Real Time Systems Number EEXX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Computer Architecture, Embedded System   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Describe real-time systems and how real-time resource management algorithms and mechanisms to meet 

application timing constraints. 
2. Explain how to conduct real-time schedulability analysis. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use RTOS for different applications 
2. Design system to meet different real time constraints in uniprocessor and multiprocessor Environment.  
 
Contents:  
Introduction of real time systems [4 Lectures]: Types of time constraints; definition of scheduling, examples of 
real time systems  
Periodic Task Scheduling [6 Lectures]:  
Timeline scheduling;Rate Monotonic scheduling; Earliest Deadline First (4L)  
Deadline Monotonic EDF with constrained deadlines (2L) 
Aperiodic task scheduling [4 Lectures]:  
Jackson’s algorithm; Horn’s algorithm; Non-preemptive scheduling (2L) 
Scheduling with precedence constraints (2L) 
Fixed-priority servers [7 Lectures]:  
Background scheduling; Polling Server Deferrable Server; Priority Exchange Sporadic Server (4L)  
Slack stealing Non-existence of optimal servers; Performance evaluation (3L) 
Dynamic priority servers [6 Lectures]:  
Dynamic Priority Exchange Server; Dynamic Sporadic Server; Total Bandwidth Server; Earliest Deadline Late 
Server; Improved Priority Exchange Server (4L) 
Improving TBS; Performance evaluation; The Constant Bandwidth Server (2L) 
Limited pre-emptive scheduling [6 Lectures]:  
Non-preemptive scheduling; Preemption thresholds (4L) 
Deferred Preemptions; Task splitting (2L) 
Real-time operating systems and Standards Standards for real-time operating systems; Commercial real-time 
systems; [6 Lectures]  
Linux related real-time kernels; Open-source real-time research kernels [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks  
1. G. C. Buttazzo (2011), 2/e, Hard Real Time Computing Systems; Springer.    
2. Phillip A. Laplante (2004), 3/e, Real Time Systems Analysis and Design, IEEE Press. 
   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 



Course Title Reconfigurable Computing Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of reconfigurable computing. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about reconfigurable architectures and their programming for system level 

designs. 
 

Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of reconfigurable computing for digital system design. 
2. Implement the basic computing architectures using reconfigurable computing platforms.  
 
Contents: 
Reconfigurable Computing: Introduction to Reconfigurable Computing, Need of Reconfigurable Computing, 
Historical perspective in terms of system design. (3 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Architectures: Introduction to Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) Technology, FPGA 
Arithmetic, Applications. (4 Lectures) 
The Systolic Model, Runtime Reconfigurable Architectures: PipeRench. (3 Lectures)  
Runtime Reconfigurable Architectures: Multi-Context, Function-Unit Architectures. (4 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Programming: Logic Emulation Architectures, Programming Reconfigurable Computers, Logic 
Cell and Datapath Mapping. (4 Lectures) 
Behavioral Synthesis, Hardware/Software Co-design, Systolic Loop Transformations. (5 Lectures) 
Software Pipelining, Retiming, Module Generators. (5 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Designs: Placement, Routing, Dynamically Reconfigurable Adaptive Viterbi Decoder. (4 
Lectures)  
Network Virtualization using Reconfigurable Hardware, Security for Reconfigurable Hardware in the Cloud, 
Partitioning. (5 Lectures)  
High Level Compilation, Power Reduction Techniques, Soft GPGPUs on an FPGA, Hybrid FPGA Networks-
on-Chip. (5 Lectures) 

Text Books 
1. Bobada,C, Introduction to Reconfigurable Computing. 1st edition, Springer, 2007. 
2. Cardoso,J. and Hubner,M., Reconfigurable Computing. Springer-Verlag, 2011. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Tessier,R., Pocek,K. and DeHon,A., "Reconfigurable Computing Architectures,"  Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 

103, no. 3, pp. 332-354, March 2015. 
2. Todman,T.,J. et al., "Reconfigurable computing: architectures and design methods,", IEE Proceedings - 

Computers and Digital Techniques, vol. 152, no. 2, pp. 193-207, March 2005. 
  

61 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Power Engineering 
  

62 
 



Title Power System Analysis and Stability Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide the capability to understand and analyze various phenomena associated with power systems both 
under steady state and transients 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Model the power system and determine various parameters, system status during normal and abnormal 
conditions 
 
Contents  
Load flow studies [10 Lectures]: Load flow problem: Ybus formulation (1L), Gauss-Seidel (5L), Newton- Raphson 
methods (3L), and decoupled power flow (1L) 
Short circuit studies [12 Lectures]: Zbus formulation (2L), symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults, symmetrical 
components and sequence networks (5L), analysis of symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults (5L) 
Power system stability [6 Lectures]: Definitions of stability problems, types of stability issues, swing equation, and 
swing curve, transient and small signal stability analysis of a single machine infinite bus system (5L), solution 
for swing equation (1L) 
Power system monitoring and protection [8 Lectures]: Current and potential transformers, introduction to SCADA, 
synchro-phasors (PMU) (3L), introduction to protective relaying, types of relays and introduction to circuit 
breakers (5L) 
Power system transients [6 Lectures]: Traveling waves and propagation of surges, overvoltage, lightning (5L), 
neutral grounding (1L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Stevenson,W.D.Jr., (1982), Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill International 
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, 6th Edition, New Age International Publishers 
3. Kothari,D.P., Nagrath,I.J., (2008), Power System Engineering, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India) 

Private Limited 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Sinha, A.K.,  Power System Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur, 
       https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105067/ 
1. Das, D., Power System Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105140/ 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 



Title Power System Operation and Control Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Engineering,   

Power System Analysis and Stability 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamentals of operation and control strategies needed for economic, efficient and reliable operation 
of power system 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand and develop methods to optimize generation scheduling and maintain security of a power system 
 
Contents  
Characteristics of power generation units [5 Lectures]: Operational and economical aspects of thermal units, 
combined cycle units, nuclear units and hydro units  
Economic dispatch [3 Lectures]: Definition of economic dispatch problem and various methods of economic 
dispatch  
Transmission losses [3 Lectures]: Incremental losses and penalty factors, B matrix loss formula 
Unit commitment [5 Lectures]: Introduction to unit commitment, constraints in unit commitment, unit 
commitment methods with and without constraints  
Hydrothermal coordination [5 Lectures]: Hydroelectric plant models, hydrothermal coordination, methods of 
hydro-scheduling  
Active power generation control [5 Lectures]:Modeling of generator, governor, prime mover and tie-line, automatic 
generation control in single area and multiarea power system  
Power system security [5 Lectures]: Factors affecting power system security, contingency analysis, sensitivity 
factors  
State estimation in power system [5 Lectures]: State estimation methods- weighted least squares, orthogonal 
decomposition, applications of state estimation  
Optimal power flow [6 Lectures]: Solution of optimal power flow, sensitivity analysis (3L), security constrained 
optimal power flow (3L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Wood,A.J., Wollenberg,B.F., (2011), Power Generation, Operation and Control, Wiley-India edition 
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, 6th Edition, New Age International Publishers. 
3. Kothari,D.P., Nagrath,I.J., (2009), Modern Power System Analysis, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Education 

Private Limited 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Das,D.,  Power System Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105104/   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 



Title Power Electronics Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Physical Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamentals of power electronic circuits and applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and analyze various types of converter circuits for applications in AC as well as DC circuits 
 
Contents  
Review of power electronic switches: Review of diode, BJT, MOSFET, IGBT as switching devices (2 lectures) 
Controlled rectifiers: SCR switching circuits, protection, series and parallel operation (2 lectures), single phase 
controlled rectifiers with R, R-L, R-L-E load, effect of source inductance (3 lectures), three phase rectifiers (3 
lectures), dual converters, power factor, and harmonics in single phase and three phase rectifiers (2 lectures) 
AC voltage controller: Principle of ON-OFF and phase control (2 lecture), single phase and three phase controllers 
(3 lectures), cycloconverter (2 lectures) 
DC-DC converters: Step-up and step-down converters with various type of loads (2 lectures), buck, boost, buck-
boost and cuk regulators, isolated DC-DC converters (5 lectures) 
Power Supplies: Introduction to switched-mode, resonant and bidirectional AC and DC power supplies (4 
lectures) 
Inverters: Principle of operation, single-phase and three-phase bridge inverter, 120° and 180° conduction (5 
lectures), PWM inverters, current source inverters, space-vector-modulation (5 lectures) 
Other converter topologies: PWM rectifiers, dual active bridge topology, introduction to multilevel inverters (2 
lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Rashid,M.H., (2004), Power Electronics Circuits, Devices, and Applications, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education Inc. 
2. Hart,D.W., (2011), Power Electronics, Tata McGraw-Hill Education Private Limited. 
3. Mohan,N., (2007), First Course on Power Electronics and Drives, MNPERE. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Bhuvaneswari,G.,  Power Electronics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102145/  
     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

65 
 



Title Industrial Drives Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an understanding of the various AC and DC drives along with the various converter topologies used 
and their control used in industry 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and develop various power electronic drives along with their control 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals of electric drives: Factors affecting selection of drives, speed-torque characteristics of motors and 
loads, characteristics and operating modes of drive motors (3 lectures), starting, braking and speed control of 
motors, 4 quadrant drives (3 lectures) 
DC motor drives: Characteristics, starting methods, braking methods, speed control using converters and 
choppers (5 lectures), full converter, semi converter and dual converter fed DC drives (3 lectures) 
Three phase induction motor drives: Starting methods, braking methods, speed control of cage rotor induction 
machines using AC voltage controllers, voltage-source and current-source inverters (5 lectures), V-by-f control 
and other control techniques, speed control of wound-rotor induction machines, slip-power recovery scheme 
(5 lectures), field oriented control and direct torque control of AC motors (2 lectures) 
Three phase synchronous motor drives: Starting methods, braking methods (5 lectures), speed control methods (3 
lectures) 
Special machines and their drives: Permanent magnet brush-less motor drives, permanent magnet synchronous 
motor drives (3 lectures), stepper, reluctance motor drives and AC and DC traction drives (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Dubey,G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd 
2.  De,N.K., Sen,P.K., (1999), Electrical Drives, Prentice Hall of India Pvt Ltd 
3.  Vas,P., (1998), Sensorless Vector and Direct Torque Control, Oxford University Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
Das,S.P., Fundamentals of Electric Drives, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104140/   
     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

66 
 



Title Measurement and Instrumentation Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an understanding of the constructional details and principle of operation of basic measuring 
instruments 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the operation of various measuring devices and choose the appropriate measuring device for 
measurement of different parameters 
 
Contents  
Measurement of Electrical Quantities: Voltmeter, ammeter, and ohmmeter, moving coil instruments (3 lectures), 
moving iron instruments, AC and DC measurements (4 lectures) 
Power and Energy Measurement: DC and AC power measurement, low power factor wattmeter, power 
measurement in three-phase circuits (3 lectures), reactive power measurement, energy meters, theory and 
operation, compensation, power factor meter (4 lectures) 
Instrument Transformers: Current and potential transformers (5 lectures) 
Measurement of Electrical Elements: Measurement of medium, low and high resistances (3 lectures), AC bridges, 
inductance and capacitance measurement (4lectures) 
Electronic Measurements: Electronic instruments for current, voltage and power measurement (5 lectures), 
Cathode ray oscilloscope, frequency and phase angle measurements using CRO spectrum (3 lectures) 
Instrumentation: Transducers, classification & selection of transducers, strain gauges, inductive & capacitive 
transducers (4 lectures), piezoelectric and Hall-effect transducers, thermistor, thermocouple, encoder (4 
lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Shawney,A.K., (2007), A Course in Electrical and Electronic Measurements and Instrumentation, 18th edition, 

Dhanpat Rai & Co. (P) Ltd. 
2. Helfrick,A.D., Cooper,W.D., (2015), Modern Electronic Instrumentation & Measurement Techniques, Pearson 

Education India 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

67 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Specializations 

  

68 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Communication Engineering Specialization 

  

69 
 



Title Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to communication over wireless fading channel. 
2.  Expose students to concepts and techniques for exploiting fading and application of these concepts in 

multiuser communication systems context. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand concepts related to deep fade, diversity techniques and channel capacity for point-to-point 

wireless communications systems. 
2. Analyze multi-user networks and understanding of techniques like opportunistic communication, 

multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successive interference cancellation. 
3. Analyze and design wireless ad-hoc networks with special emphasis on energy constrained networks 
 
Contents  
Wireless Channels [10 Lectures]:  
Review of signal detection over AWGN channels and M-ary Modulation (5L) 
Modelling of wireless channels; space, time and frequency channel coherence; input/output channel models 
for single and multi-antenna systems (5L) 
Diversity Techniques [12 Lectures]:  
Digital modulation and its performance in fading (4L) 
Deep fade and diversity (3L) 
Realizing diversity: time diversity, frequency diversity, antenna diversity (5L) 
Wireless Channel Capacity [10 Lectures]:  
Capacity of the Gaussian channels (2L) 
Outage limited and ergodic capacity of fading channels (4L) 
Waterfillingalgorithm and opportunistic communication (4L) 
Multiuser system design [10 Lectures]:  
Multiple access and random access techniques (5L) 
Multiuser channel capacity and multiuser diversity (5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication, Cambridge University Press. 
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004), Digital communication over fading channels, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng, L., Principles of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & 

Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-principles-of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 

Preparatory Course Material  
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering,       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 



Title Digital Communications: Hands-on  Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 1–0–2 [2] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. Type Core 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students with hands-on exposure towards the design and implementation of digital communication 
systems using software defined radio technology.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design communications systems by assessing the design trade-offs and real-world communication 

requirements 
2.  Utilize fundamental communication techniques such as CDMA and multicarrier modulation like OFDM for 

the current and future wireless networks relevant to industry needs.   
 
Contents  
Lecture: 
Introduction to programmable hardware, Software Architecture, USRP hardware, signal processing chain, channel 
modeling, estimation and equalization, fading and diversity, carrier and symbol synchronization, multicarrier 
modulation, CDMA 
 
Laboratory: 
Lab 1: Setting up the programmable hardware to transmit and receive signals 
Lab 2: Estimating signal power, noise power, the power spectrum, and the bandwidth of 
Signals 
Lab 3: Sampling, aliasing, interpolation, resampling, upsampling, and downsampling 
Lab 4: Dealing with narrowband channel impairments: synchronization and channel 
estimation 
Lab 5: Implementation of a transmitter and receiver using programmable hardware 
Lab 6-7: Receiver Structure & Waveform Synthesis of a Transmitter and a Receiver 
Lab 8-9: Implementation of multicarrier modulation like OFDM and synchronization using programmable 
hardware 
Lab 10: Implementation of Spectrum Sensing Techniques 
Lab 11-14: Term project 
 
Textbook  
Pu, D. and Wyglinski, A. M. (2013), Digital Communication System Engineering with Software-Defined Radio, 1st 
Edition, Artech House 
 
Self Learning Material  
Wyglinski, A. M.,  Software Defined Radio Systems and Analysis, Online Course Material, Department of Electrical 
and Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLBfTSoOqoRnOTBTLahXBlxaDUNWdZ3FdS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 



Title UAV Assisted Wireless Networks  Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Wireless Communications   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide a comprehensive overview of wireless communication and networking with UAVs.   

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Perform channel modeling for UAV-BSs and UAV-UEs, design and optimization of their deployment, 
trajectory, multiple access, and resource management. 
 
Contents  
UAV Applications and Use Cases [5 lectures]:IoT systems, Wireless backhauling for ground systems, three-
dimensional MIMO 
Basic Theoretical Background [10 Lectures]:  
Aerial channel modelling and waveform design (5L) 
Network architectures, disruption-tolerant airborne network protocols (5L) 
UAV Assisted Cellular Communications [18 Lectures]:  
Deployment of UAV base stations for optimized coverage (5L) 
UAV network modelling (5L) 
Downlink performance analysis for UAV base station (5L) 
Resource management(3L) 
Cellular Assisted UAV Sensing [9 Lectures]: 
Cooperative communication in UAV networks (5L) 
Security of UAV UEs (4L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Namuduri, K., Chaumette, S., Kim, J., and Sterbenz, J., (2017), UAV Networks and Communications, 

Cambridge University Press 
2. Saad, W., Bennis, M., Mozaffari, M., and Lin, X., (2020), Wireless Communications and Networking for 

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Cambridge University Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
Best Readings in UAV Assisted Wireless Networks, IEEE 
 https://www.comsoc.org/publications/best-readings/uav-assisted-wireless-networks 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 

 
 
 
  

72 
 



Title Optical Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Physics, Electromagnetism and   

Optics 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the basics of nonlinearities in optical devices and how they can be harnessed for processing of 

light waves. 
2. Explain the working, modeling and characterization of various optical signal processing devices along with 

their advantages and limitations. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design, characterize and analyze basic optical signal processing circuits. 
2. Appreciate the advantages of optical signal processing over conventional electronic signal processing 

techniques. 
 
Contents  
Nonlinear Optics for Signal Processing [8 Lectures]:  
Nonlinear optical susceptibility, time-domain description of optical nonlinearities (4L),  
Kramers-Kronig relations, intensity dependent refractive index of materials (4L) 
Third Order Nonlinearities [18 Lectures]:  
Theory and modeling of Optical Kerr Effect (2L),  
Self Phase Modulation and Cross Phase Modulation processes (4L),  
Optical phase conjugation, Four Wave Mixing and Third Harmonic Generation (5L), 
Photon-phonon interaction, Stimulated Brillouin, Raman and Rayleigh scattering (5L),  
Two Photon Absorption (2L)  
Optical Signal Processing Devices [16 Lectures]:  
Optical Fourier Transform (2L),  
Optical correlators (2L), 
Pulse compression, pulse shaping (4L), 
Optical interconnects (2L),  
Multiplexers, mixers, wavelength conversion (4L), 
Tunable optical delay (2L)  
 
Textbooks  
1. Boyd, R. W., (2013), Nonlinear optics. Elsevier. 
2. Dragoman D., and Dragoman M. (2013), Advanced optoelectronic devices. Vol. 1. Springer Science and Business 

Media.. 
3. Saleh, B.E.A, and Teich M.C., (1991), Fundamentals of photonics. Vol. 22. New York: Wiley. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Singh B.P and Rustagi K.C., Nonlinear Optics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, Indian Institute 
of Technology Bombay,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/101/115101008/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Roy S., Introduction toNonlinear Optics and its Applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/105/115105105/ 
 

 
  

73 
 



Title Optical Networks Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech,Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Fiber Optic communications   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce elements and components of an optical networking solution. 
2. Explore the capabilities and limitations of different network topologies. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the required network technology for a given requirement. 
2. Solve WDM network design problems. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Optical Networks: Types of traffic, Services, Optical packet and circuit switching, Optical Layered 
Architecture. Optical Network elements [5 lectures] 
Local Area Network: Network topologies, Multiplexing and Multiple access techniques [4 lectures], Network 
resource sharing, Network capacity, Protocols. [4 lectures] 
Optical Access Networks: Passive Network Topology, PON architecture [3 lectures], Multi point control protocol, 
Dynamic bandwidth allocation, FTTx networks [5 lectures] 
Metropolitan and Wide Area Networks: SONET/SDH, Optical Transport Network [3 lectures], Wavelength 
Routing Network, Routing and Assignment Algorithm. [5 lectures] 
Network Control, Management and Survivability: Network management system architecture, Functionality, 
GMPLS [3 lectures], Impairment, Survivability, Protection and Restoration. [5 lectures] 
Free-Space Optical Networks: Classification, FSO network topologies, Design factors, FSO Network 
applications. [5 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Chadha D. (2019), Optical WDM networks: from static to elastic networks, Wiley-IEEE Press. 
2. Grobe K. and Eiselt M. (2013), Wavelength Division Multiplexing, A Practical Engineering Guide, Wiley. 
3. Ramaswami R., Sivarajan K.N. and Sasaki G.H. (2010), Optical Networks: A Practical Perspective, 3rd Edition, 

Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Keiser G. (2013), Fibre Optic Communication, McGraw-Hill, 5th Edition. 

 
 
  

74 
 



Title Optical Techniques for Communications Number EE-4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic EM Theory   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce light propagation methods and techniques such as OAM Multiplexing, spatial filtering and 
Holography useful for future communication systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Work with optical components and design basic optical setups such as a free-space optical link, interferometer, 
beam analysis, imaging and Holography. 

Course Content 
Propagation Techniques: Ray propagation through optical components (mirrors, lenses, beam splitters) [4 
lectures], Propagation characteristics of Gaussian, LG and HG beams [5 lectures], OAM content, OAM 
generation, OAM Data multiplexing [3 lectures]. 
Interferometry and Holography: Coherence, Michelson and Mach-Zehnder Interferometer, Polarization concepts 
[4 lectures]. Optical Fourier Transform, Diffraction, 4-f Imaging system, Spatial filtering [4 lectures]. 
Holographic recording and reconstruction, Recording material [5 lectures], Holographic Interferometry [3 
lectures] 

Lab Experiments will be conducted on collimation, beam expansion, beam analysis, interference 
phenomenon and applications, polarization effects, Imaging and Hologram generation. 

Textbooks  
1. Saleh, B. E. A., and Teich, M. C., (2007) Fundamentals of Photonics, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Thomas K., (2005), Handbook of holographic interferometry- optical and digital methods, Wiley-VCH. 
3. Hariharan P., (2002) Basics of Holography, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Bhattacharya S., Optical Engineering, NPTEL, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106161/ 

  

75 
 



Title RF system design for Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. - Year Type Elective  
Prerequisite Engineering Electromagnetics, Microwave Circuits   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize behavior of cascaded blocks in RF system and effect of specification of blocks on system 

performance  
2. Provide basic understanding about behavior of intermodulation products, spurious responses 
3. Provide basic understanding of linearity of a system 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate and analyse system specification to control gain requirement, noise figure of the system.  
2. Obtain basic understanding of linearity of a cascade from specifications on its modules.  
3. Obtain basic understanding of the spurious responses in a conversion scheme  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Wireless Circuit Design: Radio Channel and modulation requirements, bits, symbols and 
waveforms, wireless system building blocks, system specification and their relation to circuit design- system 
noise and noise floor, System amplitude and phase behaviour, introduction to MIC- amplifier & oscillator (5 
lectures) 
Gain:S, T and X parameter, Module Gain, Overall Response, Standard Cascade, Bilateral Modules(4 lectures) 
Interconnections:Lossy Interconnections, Nonstandard Impedances, Sensitivities(3 lectures) 
Noise Figure: Noise Factor and Noise Figure, Cascaded module- applicable gain & noise figure, Impedance-
Dependent Noise Factors, Image Noise-Mixers, Extreme Mismatch-Voltage Amplifiers, Gain Controls(5 
lectures) 
Nonlinearity: Representing Nonlinear Responses, 2nd and 3rd order terms, Frequency Dependence, Cascades-
intermodulation products (IM) Adding Coherently and randomly (4 lectures) 
Intermodulation:Anomalous IMs, Measuring IMs, Intermodulation of Noise, Composite Distortion, optimizing 
cascades(4 lectures) 
Linearity improving architecture: Parallel Combining- hybrid, push-pull, Combiner Trees, Feedback, 
Feedforward - Intermods and Harmonics, Nonideal Performance(5 lectures) 
Contaminating Signals: Frequency conversion basics, Spurs, Two-Signal IMs, Hard& soft Limiting(3 lectures) 
Mixer:Mixers Through the LO Port - AM Suppression, FM Transfer, Single-Sideband Transfer, Mixing Between 
LO Components(4 lectures) 
Phase noise- Jitter, Receiver Desensitization, Sources of Phase Noise, Processing Phase Noise in a Cascade, 
Determining the Effect on Data(5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. William Egan, (2003), Practical RF System Design, by William Egan, 6th Edition, John Wiley & Sons  
2. Ulrich L. Rohde, David P. Newkirk, (2000), RF/ Microwave Circuit design for wireless applications, John 

Wiley & Sons 
 
Self Learning Material  
Kumar P., RF Integrated Circuits, Department of EE, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102012/# 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Bhattacharjee R., Microwave Engineering, Department of EEE, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc19_ee68/preview 

 
 
 
 
 

76 
 



Title RADAR Engineering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. ,M.Tech. Type Elective course 
Prerequisite Basics of RF circuits, Fundamentals of   

Communication Systems  
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Teach the fundamentals RADAR. 
2.  Teach building blocks and different types of RADAR.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the building blocks and working principles of RADAR.  
 
Contents   
Introduction: Working principle, RADAR range equations, maximum unambiguous range, pulse repetition 
frequency, radar block diagram.     (5 lectures) 
Detection: Probability of detection, False alarm, radar cross section of targets.                                  (3 lectures) 
Types of RADAR:Pulse radars and CW radars, MTI RADAR, Doppler effect, delay-line cancellers, blind speeds.   
(5 lectures) 
Moving target and tracking: Moving target detector, limitations of MTI, tracking with radar, monopulse tracking, 
conical scan.       (5 lectures) 
RADAR measurements: RADAR measurement and accuracy, Range and velocity ambiguities, the ambiguity 
diagram.    (4 lectures) 
Pulse shaping: Pulse compression-principles, matched filter, chirp waveforms.  (4 lectures)  
Clutter: Descriptions of land & sea clutter, detection of targets in clutter. (4 lectures) 
RADAR antenna: Requirements of RADAR antenna, antenna parameters, reflector antennas, scanning phased 
array antennas, diplexing antenna.  (5 lectures) 
RADAR receiver:  Receiver architecture, heterodyne receiver, noise figure. (4 lectures) Transmitter: Transmitter 
architecture, isolation between transmitter and receiver, duplexers. (3 lectures)    
 
Textbook  
1. Skolnik M.I., (2017), Introduction to RADAR systems, 3rd Ed., McGraw Hill. 
2. Richards M.A., (2005), Fundamentals of RADAR signal processing, Indian Ed., McGraw Hill. 
3. Carpentier M.H., (1988), Principles of modern RADAR systems, Artech house publishers. 
 
Self Learning Material  
O'Donnell R.M. , Introduction to RADAR systems, MIT open course, MIT Lincoln Laboratory,   
https://ocw.mit.edu/resources/res-ll-001-introduction-to-radar-systems-spring-2007/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

77 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Intelligent Communication and Networking Specialization 
 
 
  

78 
 



Title Design and Analysis of Communication Networks Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data and Computer Communications, Signals and   

Systems 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide in-depth understanding of communication network analysis, modeling and simulation techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyse and evaluate communication networks using analytical and simulation-based methods including 

traffic models, graph models and mobility models.  
2. Design and program software components for network simulations and analysis. 
 
Contents  
Probabilistic models for communication systems [10 Lectures]: 
Linear System with Random process Input (4L) 
LTI System with WSS Process Input, point-to-point communications link (2L) 
multi-point links, random and multiple access techniques (4L) 
Modelling and Analysis of Communication Networks [16 Lectures]: 
Random number generation, mobility models (3L) 
Channel models, topology models, graph theory and algorithms (5L) 
Queuing models, queuing networks (5L) 
Network calculus (3L) 
Simulation of Communication Networks [16 Lectures]:  
Discrete event-based simulation (3L) 
Monte-carlo simulation(4L) 
Rate-based simulation (3L) 
Analysis of simulation results, statistical analysis (4L)  
Visualization of results (2L) 

Lab Experiments will be conducted on traffic modeling, link-level, system-level, packet level simulation, 
SW/HW in the loop. 

Textbooks  
1. Srikant, R.  and Ying, L., (2014), Communication Networks: An Optimization, Control and Stochastic 

Networks Perspective , Cambridge University Press. 
2. Kumar, A., Manjunath, D. and Kuri, J., (2004), Communication Networking: An Analytical Approach, 

Morgan Kaufman Series in Networking, (an imprint of Elsevier Science) 
3. Bonald, T. and Feuillet, M., (2011), Network Performance Analysis, Wiley.  
 
Reference Book 
Law, A. M., (2015), Simulation Modeling and Analysis, Fifth Edition, McGraw-Hill. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Scalable Wireless Ad-hoc Network Simulator, http://jist.ece.cornell.edu/index.html 
   
Preparatory Material 
Modiano, E.,  Data Communication Networks, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 
 

 
 
 

79 
 



Title Intelligent Radio Networks Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering/ Computer Science and L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data   

and Computer Communications 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of the intricacies involved in making intelligent and cognitive radios work. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Use intelligent techniques to address the challenges and trade-offs in cognitive radio networks  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Software defined radios (SDR) [6 lectures]:  
Spectrum scarcity, Spectrum white space, Fixed spectrum allocation [3L], 
Software defined radio (SDR), Limitations of SDR [3L]. 
Cognitive radios [6 lectures]:  
Introduction, Evolution, Concept, Dynamic spectrum access, Cognitive cycle [3L], 
Functions, spectrum sensing, spectrum management, spectrum mobility, Cognitive radio architecture [3L]. 
Software Defined Networking [10 lectures]: 
Evolution, operation, applications [5L], 
Open flow specifications, network function virtualization [5L]. 
Cognitive Radio Networking [15 lectures]:  
MAC layer for CRN, routing models in CRN [5L], 
Cross layer considerations: impact on upper layer protocol design, trade-offs[10L]. 
Intelligent radio and Intelligent Radio Networking [10 lectures]: 
Intelligent techniques for spectrum sensing, spectrum access and spectrum sharing [5L], 
Use of AI and ML in network management, applications and services [5L]. 
 
Laboratory: 
Introduction to MATLAB, GNU Radio and USRP platform, Simulate CR/IR network in MATLAB, Centralized 
cooperative spectrum sensing in CRN using ns3, Experiments with WiFi based WLAN MAC protocols 
 
Textbooks  
1. Xiao, Y., and Hu, F. (2008), Cognitive radio networks, 1st Edition, CRC press. 
2. Göransson, P., Black, C. and Culver, T. (2016), Software Defined Networks: A Comprehensive Approach, 2nd 

Edition, Morgan Kauffman. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Rawat, M.,  Basics of Software Defined Radio and Practical Applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department 

of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107107/ 

2. K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang and Y. A. Zhang, "The Roadmap to 6G: AI Empowered Wireless 
Networks," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84-90, August 2019. 

3. Relevant recent research papers in the field. 
   
Preparatory Material 
Modiano, E., Data Communication Networks, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 

 
 
 
 

80 
 



Title Computation Oriented Communications  Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and   

Computer Communications 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the area of computation oriented communications   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design communication networks for federated learning 
 
Contents  
Resources for Communication networks for distributed computing [6 Lectures] 
Federated Learning [6 Lectures] 
Edge Intelligence and distributed computation [6 Lectures] 
Rate-latency-reliability tradeoff[6 Lectures] 
Network Intelligence [6 Lectures] 
Communication network design and implementation for federated learning [6 Lectures] 
Application aware communication for IoT devices [6 Lectures] 
 
Textbook  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Konečný J., McMahan, H.B., Yu, F. X., Richtarik, P., Suresh, A. T., and Bacon, D., Federated Learning: 

Strategies for Improving Communication Efficiency, NIPS Workshop on Private Multi-Party Machine 
Learning 2016. 

2. Bennis, M., Debbah, M. and Poor, H. V., "Ultrareliable and Low-Latency Wireless Communication: Tail, Risk, 
and Scale," in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 10, pp. 1834-1853, Oct. 2018 

3. Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
    https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 

  

81 
 



Title Machine Learning for Communications  Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and   

Computer Communications 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the area of machine learning in the context of communications   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Apply machine learning techniques to various signal processing requirements for communications including 
channel estimation, automatic modulation classification and iterative channel decoding. 
 
Contents  
Channel estimation and prediction [14 Lectures]:  
Adaptive transmission systems, The Impact of Outdated CSI, Classical Channel Prediction, Neural Network 
Based Prediction Schemes (5L) 
Flat fading SISO Prediction, Channel-Gain Prediction with Real-Valued and Complex-Valued RNN, Channel 
Envelope Prediction, Frequency-Selective SISO Prediction (5L) 
Performance and Complexity, Computational Complexity (4L) 
Automatic Modulation Classification [10 Lectures]: 
Signal Models for modulation classification (2L) 
Likelihood based classifiers (2L) 
Distribution Test-based classifiers (2L) 
Modulation classification Features (2L) 
Machine Learning models for Modulation classification (2L) 
Channel Encoding and Decoding [18 Lectures]:  
Overview of Channel coding and Deep Learning (3L) 
DNN for Channel coding and to Decoding Directly (5L) 
DNNs for joint equalization and Channel Decoding, CNNs for Decoding (5L) 
Decoding by Eliminating Correlated Channel Noise, BP-CNN Decoding (5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Zhechen Zhu, Ashoke K. Nandi, Automatic Modulation Classification: Principles, Algorithms     and 

Applications 
2. Luo, F. L., (2020), Machine Learning for Future Wireless Communications, Wiley 
3. He, R., and Ding Z., (2019), Application of Machine Learning in Wireless Communications, The Institution of 

Engineering and Technology 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering,       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

82 
 



Title Delay Tolerant Networks Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering/ Computer Science and L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Data Communication Networks, Data and   

Computer Communications 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Expose students to theoretical and practical work and knowledge in the field of Delay-Tolerant Networks   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Study the problems with networking in networks tolerant of huge delay and with problems in the 

connectivity. 
2. Analysis of protocols and possible application used in DTNs (sensor networks, space communications, 

mobile ad-hoc networks) 
 
Contents  
Introduction for Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) [3 Lectures] 
Networking in stress and high heterogeneous environments. Asynchronous message sending. Combination of store-and-
forward message switching with physical data transmission/receiving.  [ 5 Lectures] 
Medium access control for delay-tolerant services. Quality of service; streaming control [4 Lectures] 
Modeling of telecommunication traffic; modeling of delays and queues; modeling of delay-tolerant queues. [4 Lectures] 
DTN protocol stack [ 3 Lectures] 
Deterministic and probabilistic routing protocols [5 Lectures] 
DTN Security issues [8 Lectures]: Attacks on DTN (3L), Solution (5L) 
DTN application requirements, Concrete DTN implementations [11 Lectures]: inter-planetary communications (3L), 
submarine communications (2L), sensor networks (3L), mobile ad-hoc networks (3L) 
 
Textbook  
Vasilakos, A. V.,  Zhang, Y., and Spyropoulos, T., (2011), Delay Tolerant Networks: Protocols and Applications, 
CRC Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 

 
 
 
 
  

83 
 



Title Hardware Aware Communications Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and   

Computer Communications, Intelligent Radio 
Networks 

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Concepts related to hardware aware communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Perform hardware-algorithm co-design for communications. 
 
Contents  
Application aware communication for IoT devices [6 Lectures] 
Joint Sampling, Communication, and Inference [6 Lectures] 
Intelligent communication for heterogeneous hardware constraints  [6 Lectures] 
Transfer learning for different hardware constraints [6 Lectures] 
Hardware-algorithm co-design [6 Lectures] 
Full-Dulplex Radios: Self-Interference Cancellation [6 Lectures] 
Hardware-aware communication protocols [6 Lectures] 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 

  

84 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nano and Flexible Electronics Specialization 
 

  

85 
 



Title Introduction To Spintronics  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamental concepts on spintronics 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the operation of spin based devices 
2. Apply the knowledge for the improvement of spin based devices  
 
Contents  
Introduction: The early history of spin, Quantum Mechanics of spin, Bohr Planetary Model and Space 
Quantization, Bloch sphere, Spin-orbit interaction, exchange interaction (5 Lectures)  
Spin relaxation mechanism, spin relaxation in metals and semiconductors, spin Galvanic effect, spin 
dependent transport and tunneling (5 Lectures) 
Spin Phenomena [6 Lectures]:  
Spin Hall Effect, Galvanic Effect (2 Lectures), Spin Capacitor Effect, Spin Hanle Effect, Spin Seebeck Effect, Spin 
Peltier Effect (4 Lectures) 
Spin Transfer Torque [8 Lectures]: 
Introduction, Spin-transfer drive magnetic dynamics (4 Lectures), Current-driven switching of magnetization, 
Domain wall motion and scattering (4 Lectures) 
Semiconductor Spintronics [9 Lectures]: 
Quantum spin-polarized transport, Pure spin currents, Spin-orbit interaction in semiconductors (4 Lectures), 
Spectral problem of the Rashba Hamiltonian, Geometric spin phases, Diluted magnetic semiconductors (5 
Lectures) 
Spintronic Devices [9 Lectures]:  
Spin diode and transistors, Datta-Das spin-FET, Spin-Valve, spin based bio-sensors (4 Lectures) 
Qubits and introduction to quantum computing (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
S. Bandyopadhyay, M. Cahay, Introduction to Spintronics. CRC Press, 2nd edition, 2015. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems. Cambridge University Press, Revised edition, 1997. 
2. Žutić, I., Fabian, J. & Das Sarma, S. Spintronics: fundamentals and applications. Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 323–410 

(2004) 
3. David J. Griffiths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Pearson Education, 2nd edition, 2015. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Prof. A. Perumal, Spintronics: Physics and Technology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103039/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

86 
 



Title Flexible and Printed Electronics Number EEL7330 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Understanding of Electronic Materials and  Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Explain fundamentals of thin-film electronic materials and devices for flexible electronics. 
2.  Teach the concepts for heterogeneous integration of thin-film devices on flexible platforms. 
3.  Will give an overview of the different printing and coating techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Identify the advantages, drawbacks, performances, complementarity and uniqueness of large area 

manufacturing vs. silicon technology 
2.  Integrate the operation principles, architectures and processing of main devices and systems fabricated for 

flexible electronics 
3.  Predict systems integration issues and propose methods for integration and encapsulation of printed devices 

and systems 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Flexible and Printed Electronics (2 Lectures):  
Evolution of Flexible Electronics, review of cutting edge research on flexible, plastic, stretchable, conformable 
or printed electronics. Materials, components, and systems, applications for IoT  
Materials, Processing, and Manufacturing (12 Lectures):  
Various semiconductors, dielectric, and conducting materials, Organic semiconductors (4 L); From chemical 
bonds to bands, Charge injection and transport, Examples of printable functional materials , Thin-film 
Deposition and Processing Methods for Flexible Devices (4 L), Solution-based Patterning Processes; Ink-jet 
printing, gravure and other processes, surface energy effects, multilayer patterning (4 L) 
Flexible Thin-Film Transistors and Circuits (14 Lectures):  
Thin-Film Transistor; Device structure and performance, Electrical characteristics, parameter extraction, 
characterization methods for rigid and flexible devices, electrical stability, printed transistors (5 L); 
Organic/polymer, metal-oxide, electrolyte gated, Case studies, submicrometer OTFTs and gravure printed 
OTFTs (5 L), From transistors to circuits, circuits on flexible and non- silicon substrates, Contacts and Interfaces 
to Organic and Inorganic Electronic Devices, Schottky contacts, defects, carrier recombination, effect of applied 
mechanical strain (4 L) 
Other Flexible Devices and System Integration (14 Lectures):  
Organic Light Emitting Diodes, flexible OLED displays and lighting, smart wallpaper (5 L), Organic Solar Cells, 
sensors, flexible batteries, supercapacitors, logic, memory, RFID tags (5 L), Latest applications, Encapsulation, 
Roll to roll processes, Integration Issues, and Designs for Future (4 L) 
 
Textbook 
1. Nisato, G.,  Lupo, D., Ganz, S. (Editors) (2016), Organic and Printed Electronics: Fundamentals and Applications, 

1st Edition, CRC Press 
2. Caironi, M., Noh, Y-Y., (Editors) (2015), Large Area and Flexible Electronics, 2nd Edition, WILEY-VCH 
3. Wong, W. S., and Salleo, A., (Editors) (2009) Flexible electronics: Materials and Applications, 1st Edition, Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
Recent Papers form Flexible and Printed Electronics area, IEEE, IOP, AIP, RSC and others 

 

87 
 



Title Advanced Compact Modeling Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Specialization Core 
Prerequisite Physics and Modeling of the MOS   

Transistors 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of industry standard compact modeling techniques  
2. Introduce SPICE simulations  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify best compact modeling approach for their problem 
2. Develop own compact models and use them in circuit simulations 
 
Contents  
Introduction to TCAD Simulations, SPICE simulations and Compact Modeling (3 Lectures)  
Resistor and Diode Modeling [7 Lectures]:  
Semiconductor resistors, 2-terminal resistor model, 3-terminal resistor model (4 Lectures) 
JUNCAP2 diode model, charge and capacitance models, diode breakdown model (3 Lectures) 
Compact Modeling Techniques [7 Lectures]:  
Charge based, threshold voltage based and surface potential-based modeling of MOS transistor, table look-
up-based models (4 Lectures) 
Developing analytical solutions, error margin. Accessing in-built compact models inside simulators (3 
Lectures) 
Advanced Multi-Gate Devices [7 Lectures]:  
Introduction to FinFETs, Charge based modeling of FinFETs (4 Lectures) 
Introduction to Gate-All-Around Transistors and modeling (3 Lectures) 
Parameter Extraction and Benchmark Testing: Importance of parameter extraction and extraction procedure. 
Symmetry tests for DC and capacitances, harmonic balance test, slope-ratio tests, gm/Id test. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. G. Gildenblat, Compact Modeling: Principles, Techniques and Applications. Springer, 2010.  
2. W. Liu, MOSFET Models for SPICE Simulation: Including BSIM3v3 and BSIM4, Wiley, 2001 
 
Self Learning Material  
Research papers on semiconductor device modeling 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
K. Kundert, Designer’s Guide to SPICE and SPECTRE, Springer, 1995 

 
  

88 
 



Title Quantum Nanoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 4th Year Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Each the fundamentals of quantum nanoelectronics 
2. Explain the nano structures classifications and transport mechanism in quantum structures 
3. Briefly teach the fabrication and characterization of Nanoelectronic Devices 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Have a deeper understanding of Nanostructures 
2.  Understand the basic concepts of Nanoelectronic devices  
 
Contents   
Introduction and review of electronic technology (5 lectures): 
Electronics to nanoelectronics, particles, waves and Schrodinger Equation, quantum wells, wires and dots, 
quantum description of metals, semiconductors, junction devices                                                                                                                   
Building blocks for nanoelectronic devices (15 lectures):  
Fabrication and characterization methods for nanoelectronics (5 L); FET – size limits and alternative forms, 
devices based on electron tunneling, resonant tunnel diodes (5 L); Single electron transistors, molecular 
electronics, hybrid electronics (5 L) 
Transport of charge in Nanostructures under Electric field (8 lectures):  
Parallel transport, hot electrons, perpendicular transport (4 L), Quantum transport in nanostructures, Coulomb 
blockade (4 L) 
Transport of charge in magnetic field (5 lectures):  
Effect of magnetic field on a crystal. Aharonov-Bohm effect, the Shubnikov-de Hass effect, the quantum Hall 
effect.                                           
Alternate Devices (9 lectures):  
Structure and properties of heterojunction devices (4 L), Heterostructure semiconductor laser, Quantum well 
laser, quantum dot LED, quantum dot laser, Quantum well optical modulator (5 L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Martinez-Duart J. M., Martin Palma R. J., Rueda F. A., (2006), Nanotechnology for Microelectronics and 

optoelectronics, Elsevier 
2. Fahrner W. R., (2005), Nanotechnology and Nanoelectronics, Springer 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Nanoelectronics: Devices and Materials, Centre for Nanoscience and Engineering, IISc Bangalore, NPTEL 
Course,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117108047/ 

 
  

89 
 



Title Non-Volatile Memory Technologies Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 

/Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background knowledge of advanced non-volatile memory technologies.  
2. Teach the students about emerging memory devices and applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Describe the structure and operation of non-volatile devices, and challenges associated with them 
2.  Explain the physics with new structures such RRAM devices 
3.  Understand the operation of new memory technologies and related circuits. 
 
Contents  
Memory Development for CMOS (8 Lectures): 
Historical Progress in Data Storage Devices and Techniques for Computing and CMOS, Scaling of Memory 
and ITRS (4 L), Memory Types and Hierarchy, Static and Dynamic Memory Designs, NAND and NOR Flash 
Memory, Fabrication Techniques (4 L)  
 
Emerging Non-Volatile Memory Technologies (20 Lectures): 
Non-volatile memory technologies and their properties, Magnetoresistive Random Access Memory (MRAM), 
Phase change RAM (PCRAM), Ferroelectric RAM (FeRAM) (5 L), Resistive RAM (RRAM), Applications of 
RRAM, Fabrication and Process Considerations (5L); Memristers, Synapse, RRAM devices and Memristers 
for Neuromorphic Applications (5 L);  Design implications of emerging non-volatile memory (NVM) 
technologies, in-memory computing (5 L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Hu, C. (2010), Modern Semiconductor Devices for Integrated Circuits, Prentice Hall. 
2. Suri, M. (2020), Applications of Emerging Memory Technology, Springer.     
 
Self Learning Material 
Recent Papers on Emerging Memory Technologies 

 
  

90 
 



Title Semiconductor Optoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Provide students an understanding of operation of semiconductor optoelectronic devices. 
2. Teach students heterojunctions and quantum wells and their application to optoelectronic devices. 
3. Teach students design, analysis, & modelling of semiconductor LEDs and lasers. 
4. Teach students design of various types of photodetectors and optical fibers 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Be familiarized with optoelectronics devices and understand the physical principle behind this. 
2. Design single-mode junction lasers at different wavelengths to meets specs. 
3. Design junction & avalanche photodiodes to meet specs  
4. Incorporate heterostructures and quantum wells to improve device performance devices.  
 
Contents   
Compound Semiconductors [6 Lectures]:  
Semiconductor optoelectronic materials, Structures (2L) 
Fermi level and quasi Fermi levels, band gap modification(4L) 
Semiconductor Photon Sources [4 Lectures]: Interaction of photons with electrons and holes in a semiconductor, 
Rates of emission and absorption, Luminescence 
Quantum structures in semiconductors [4 Lectures]: Quantum wells, quantum dots, quantum wires. 
Light Emitting diodes [5 Lectures]: materials, structure and device characteristics 
Semiconductor Laser[9 Lectures]:  
Dasic structure, theory and device characteristics, DFB, DBR (5L) 
Quantum well and VCSE Lasers, Laser diode arrays(4L) 
Semiconductor Photodetectors [6 Lectures]: Types of photodetectors: photoconductors and photodiodes, PIN 
diodes and Avalanche photodetectors and their characteristics 
Solar cells [4 Lectures]: Basic principle, current voltage characteristics, Spectral response, Heterojunction and 
cascaded solar cells. 
Optics [4 Lectures]: Integrated optics, Optical fibers and their characteristics, Fiber optic communication systems 
                                                                                                         
Textbooks  
1. Sze S. M., (2001), Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Streetman B. G., Banerjee S. K., (2007), Solid State Electronic Devices, Pearson Education Asia. 
3. Bhattacharya P., (1993), Semiconductor Optoelectronics devices, Pearson Education 
 
 

 
  

91 
 



Title Organic Optoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory /Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide fundamental understanding of the optical and electronic properties of organic materials and 

devices 
2. Teach the students the basics of the emerging technological area of printed flexible optoelectronics 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Demonstrate understanding of the various key classes of organic optoelectronics, their basic device 

structures as well as identify their fundamental advantages and disadvantages 
2. Propose an appropriate characterization technique in order to characterize a specific property relating to 

the material and the targeted application  
3. Apply the knowledge of an enabling technology meeting the needs of society, in the field of organic 

electronics and nanotechnology 
 
Contents  
 
Organic Molecules and Molecular Solids (5 Lectures): Electronic structure of atoms, Atomic and Molecular 
Orbitals, LCAO, Bonding and antibondig orbitals, Covalent Bond, Sigma and Pi Bonds, Energy Levels, 
Spectroscopic properties, Aggregates, Van der Waals Bonding, Hydrogen Bonding 
Photophysics and Conduction (9 Lectures):  
Excited states: Absorption and emission, Singlet and triplet states, Radiative and non-radiative transitions, 
Dimer, Eximers; Excitons: Wannier Exciton, Charge-transfer Exciton Frenkel Exciton, Exciton Diffusion, 
Excitonic Energy Transfer (5 L); Conduction in Organic Solids: Conductivity: carrier concentration versus 
mobility, Carrier generation, Hopping transport, Mobility measurements, Traps. (4 L) 
Flat panel display technologies and Lasers (12 Lectures):  
Physics of liquid-crystal displays; organic light-emitting diodes: materials, devices and applications (4 L); 
fundamentals of radiometry, Organic Light Emitting Transistors (4 L), Lasing Action in Organic 
Semiconductors: Lasing Process, Optically Pumped Organic Lasers, Electrical Pumping of Organic Lasers (4 
L).  
Photovoltaics and Photodetectors (8 Lectures):  
Photovoltaic Devices, Organic Heterojunction Photovoltaic Cells, Organic/Nanorod hybrid Photovoltaics (4 
L), Gratzel Cells (Dye sensitized solar cells), Photodetector Devices (4 L) 
Essential Fabrication Technology (8 Lectures): Film Formation Techniques: Spin coating,  Langmuir-Blodget, 
Evaporation, Chemical Vapor Phase Deposition (4 L), Printing and coating techniques, Ink-Jet Printing, Self-
Assembly, Introduction to modern xerography (4 L) 
 
Textbook  
Hu, W., (Editor), (2013), Organic Optoelectronics, 1st Edition, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
Recent Papers on topics such as OLEDs, OLETs and OPVs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 



 
 
 
 

Smart Grid Specialization 
 

  

93 
 



 
Title Introduction to Smart Grid Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Power Engineering (for B.Tech. students)   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide concepts and topics that are relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate exploring research 
opportunities 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the basic concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies that underpin such 
development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and technological potentials 
 
Contents  
 
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features and challenges 
of smart grid (5 lectures) 
Energy Resources: Centralized vs. distributed generation (1 lecture); renewable energy: solar, wind, 
hydropower, biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, and policies of renewable energy (5 lectures); 
renewable sources integration – overcoming intermittence; storage systems technology (4 lectures) 
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV): History of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions (1 lecture); EV and electric 
power grid; PEV charging infrastructure, challenges and solutions (4 lectures); PEV as an energy storage 
device and an energy source (V2G) (2 lectures) 
Demand-side management: Load profile of the power grid; market pricing (3 lectures); peak shaving and valley 
filling; load forecasting (4 lectures); regulations and policies (3 lectures) 
Monitoring and Protection: Wide-area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU (4 lectures); advanced 
metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering (3 lectures); communication infrastructure and technologies 
(3 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Willey-IEEE 
India Press 
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Gay,S.E., Emadi,A., (2005), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles: 
Fundamentals, Theory, and Design, CRC Press 
3.  Bansal,R., (2019), Power System Protection in Smart Grid Environment, CRC Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
The Smart Grid: An Introduction, 
http://www.oe.energy.gov/SmartGridIntroduction.htm, Department of Energy, 2008. 
 

 
 
  

94 
 



Title Renewable Energy Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide exposure to operation of various non-conventional energy sources, their characteristics, and their 
interface with grid 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and develop standalone and grid connected renewable energy systems 
 
Contents  
Solar PV: Solar PV characteristics, cell, module, array, series parallel combination, partial shading, MPPT (3 
lectures), grid synchronization using various converter topologies (3 lectures) 
Solar Thermal: Principle of operation, thermal efficiency, concentrators-architecture, applications (4 lectures) 
Wind Energy Systems: Principle of operation, types of wind turbines, Cp-λ characteristics, Betz limit, MPPT, 
onshore and offshore wind farms (4 lectures), types of wind generators-operation and control of various types 
of generators (6 lectures) 
Hydro Power Generation: Hydro systems, hydro resources, types of hydro turbine, small, mini and micro hydro 
systems, pumped storage (6 lectures) 
Fuel Cells: Types, principle of operation, V-I characteristics, applications (4 lectures) 
Other Renewable Energy Sources: Introduction to geothermal, ocean, biomass energy generation (6 lectures) 
Energy Storage Systems: Introduction to various mechanical, chemical, electro-chemical, and electrical storage 
systems and their applications (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Willey-IEEE India 

Press 
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
3. Bhadra,S.N., Kastha,D., Banerjee, S., (2005), Wind Electrical Systems, Oxford Univ. Press 

 
 
  

95 
 



Title Power Quality Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering    
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide knowledge of: 
1. Various Power quality issues and their origin 
2. Impact of various power quality problems on appliances  
3. Various compensators/filters used for mitigating different PQ issues 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have ability to: 
1. Identify the sources of various power quality problems. 
2. Estimate the impact of various power quality problems on appliances. 
3. Decide the compensators and filters to keep the power quality indices within the standards 
 
Contents  
Overview and definition of power quality (PQ): Sources of pollution and regulations (2 lectures), power quality 
problems, rapid voltage fluctuations voltage unbalance, voltage dips and voltage swells, short duration 
outages (4 lectures) 
Definitions Voltage sag analysis and mitigation: Sag caused by motor starting, sag caused by utility fault clearing, 
sag mitigation, sag magnitude and duration calculations, RMS voltage, calculation in 1-phase systems (6 
lectures) 
Harmonics: Effects-within the power system, interference with communication harmonic measurements, 
harmonic elimination (4 lectures) 
Harmonic distortion: Overview of power system harmonics, harmonic analysis, harmonic sources-the static 
converters, transformer magnetization and non-linearities, rotating machines, arc furnaces, fluorescent 
lighting (5 lectures), total harmonic distortion, rms and average value calculations, effects of harmonic 
distortion (3 lectures) 
Monitoring power quality: Monitoring essentials, power quality measuring equipment, current industry trends 
(4 lectures) 

Textbook  
1. Kennedy,B.W., (2000), Power Quality Primer, McGrawHill. 
2. Dugan,R.C., Mcgranaghan,M.F., Santoso,S., Beaty,H.W., (2002), Electrical Power System Quality, 

McGrawHill. 
3. Bollen,M.H.J., (2007), Understanding Power Quality Problems: Voltage Sag and Interruptions, IEEE Press. 

 
  

96 
 



 
Title Power System Protection Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability   
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide knowledge of: 
1.  Various protection schemes and their applications in power industry 
2.  Relay coordination, instrument transformers 
3.  Numerical protection schemes based on signal processing techniques 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design/propose protection schemes for various power system components based on digital signal 

processing 
2. Design relay coordination systems in distribution and transmission 
 
Contents  
Overview of Power System Protection: Architecture of protection system, evolution of relays, zones of protections, 
concept of primary and back-up protection (2 lectures) 
Overcurrent Protection: Principles of fuse and overcurrent protection and application to feeder and motor 
protection, relay coordination in distribution system (6 lectures) 
Distance Protection: Principles of distance relaying (2 lectures) and application to transmission system 
protection, relay coordination (5 lectures) 
Differential Protection: Principles of differential protection (2 lectures) and application to transformer, bus bar 
and generator armature winding protection (5 lectures) 
Introduction to Digital Relaying: Sampling, concept of moving window, signal conditioning, signal processing (4 
lectures) 
Instrument Transformer: Current and voltage transformers in power system protection (6 lectures) 
Circuit breakers: Arc initiation and quenching, oil circuit breakers, air blast circuit breakers vacuum circuit 
breakers, SF6 circuit breakers (5 lectures), current chopping, reverse recovery voltage (3 lectures) 
Lightning arresters: Principle of operation and types (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Singh, L.P., (2017), Digital Protection: Protective Relaying from Electromechanical to Microprocessor, 2nd Edition, 

New Age International Publications 
2. Ram,B., Vishwakarma,D.N., (2017), Power System Protection and Switchgear, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill 

Publications. 
3. Phadke,A.G., Thorp,J.S., (2009), Computer relaying for Power System, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 

Publications 
 
Self Learning Material 
Soman,S.A.,  Power System Protection, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101039/   

 
  

97 
 



 
Title Power System Dynamics and Control Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability (for B.Tech   

student) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide exposure to dynamic behaviour of synchronous machines under small and large disturbances and 
the concept of voltage stability in a power system 
2.  Provide exposure to the mathematical methods of improving system stability 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design and implement techniques to control a power system 
2.  Design control techniques/stabilizers to improve the system stability 
 
Contents  
Introduction to stability problem: Rotor angle stability, voltage stability, mid-term and long-term stability, small 
signal stability, transient stability, oscillatory and non-oscillatory instability (2 lectures) 
Modeling of synchronous machine: synchronous machine parameters, dq-axis modeling, voltage equations, per-
unit modeling, equivalent circuit, dq-axis time constants, swing equations (4 lectures), synchronous machine 
representation in stability students, capability curve of an alternator (3 lectures) 
Excitation systems: Elements, types, dynamic performance measures, control and protective functions (5 
lectures), modeling of excitation systems (2 lectures) 
Governor modeling and automatic generation control: Turbine, governor modeling, isochronous governor, speed-
droop characteristics, automatic generation control (3 lectures) 
Small signal stability analysis: Eigen properties, participation and sensitivity analysis (3 lectures), SMIB system, 
synchronizing and damping torque, K1-K6 model (5 lectures), PSS design and types (2 lectures) 
Transient stability analysis: Equal area criteria, direct method of transient stability analysis (5 lectures) 
Voltage stability issues: PV characteristics, voltage collapse phenomenon, prevention of voltage collapse (5 
lectures) 
Sub synchronous oscillations: Torsional oscillations in multi-mass turbine, interactions with nearby dc systems 
(3 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kundur,P., (1994), Power System Stability and Control, McGraw Hill 
2. Machowski,J., Bialek,J., Bumby,J.R., (2008), Power Systems Dynamics, Stability and Control, 2nd Edition, John 

Wiley. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Kothari,M.L.,  Power System Dynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102080/   

 
  

98 
 



Title HVDC and FACTS Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability, Power Electronics   

(for B.Tech students) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Present the need and operational aspects of HVDC transmission systems along with their associated 
    converters and their control 
2. Provide concepts of series and shunt compensation to enhance the performance of transmission lines and 

stability of Power System using FACTS devices  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop converters and their control methods in HVDC transmission systems 
2. Develop converter topologies and their control methods for FACTS devices 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Introduction of DC power transmission technology, comparison of AC and DC transmission, 
advantages, limitations and types of HVDC transmission systems (3 lectures) 
LCC HVDC systems: Ignition angle, commutation overlap, relation between AC and DC quantities (4 lectures) 
Control of HVDC systems: CIA, CC, CEA characteristics, current limits (3 lectures) 
Harmonics and filters: AC and DC side harmonics (3 lectures) 
Interaction with AC system: Effective Short Circuit Ratio, dynamic overvoltage, voltage stability, harmonic 
resonance (2 lectures) 
Introduction to VSC HVDC systems: Introduction to VSC HVDC systems, voltage analysis, active and reactive 
power flow, control of VSC HVDC systems (3 lectures) 
FACTS devices: Objectives of compensation, types of compensation (2 lectures) 
Shunt compensators: TCR, TSR, TSC, SVC and STATCOM - principle of operation, modeling, and control (6 
lectures) 
Series compensation: SSSC, TSSC, TCSC, and TCSR - principle of operation, modeling, and control (6 lectures) 
Voltage and phase angle regulators: Thyristor controlled voltage and phase angle regulators - principle of 
operation, modeling, and control (4 lectures) 
Power flow controllers – UPFC and IPFC - principle of operation, modeling, and control (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Padiyar,K.R., (2017), HVDC Power Transmission Systems, 3rd Edition, New Age Publishers 
2. Hingorani,L.G., Gyugyi,L., (2000), Understanding FACTS: Concepts and Technology of Flexible AC Transmission 

Systems, IEEE Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Singh,S.N.,  High Voltage DC Transmission, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104013/ 

2.  Bhattacharya,A.,  Facts Devices, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineering, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107114/ 

 
 
  

99 
 



 
Title Power System Restructuring Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power Engineering (for BTech students)   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of economics of a restructured power system 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Model markets, calculate and analyze price associated with power generation and transmission in a 
restructured power system 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Reasons and objectives for restructuring of power industry - Indian and global scenario, 
restructuring process, entities involved, market place mechanisms (4 lectures) 
Fundamentals of Economics: Introduction, consumer and suppliers behavior, market equilibrium, costs of 
production, competitive market (5 lectures) 
Market Models: Introduction, models based on contractual agreement, comparisons of market models, 
electricity vs. other commodities (4 lectures) 
Transmission Congestion Management: Introduction, classification of congestion management methods, ATC, 
non-market methods, nodal pricing, inter-zonal intra-zonal congestion management, capacity alleviation 
method (6 lectures) 
Locational Marginal Prices: Fundamentals, LMP formulation implementation, LMP using AC and DC OPF (4 
lectures) 
Ancillary Service Management: Type, services related to load-generation balancing, voltage and reactive power, 
black start capability service, co-optimization of energy and reserve services (4 lectures) 
Pricing of transmission network usage and loss allocation: Principles and methods of transmission pricing, 
classification of transmission pricing methods, database issues in transmission pricing, loss allocation methods, 
comparison (5 lectures) 
Market power and generators bidding: Attributes of a perfectly competitive market, the firm’s supply decision 
under perfect competition, imperfect competition, market power, financial markets, introduction to optimal 
bidding by a generator company, optimal bidding methods (6 lectures) 
Global and Indian energy market evolution: Global markets - ERCOT, PJM, Nordic power markets, need of 
standard market design, Indian market framework, reform initiatives, ABT, electricity acts (4 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kirschen,D., Strbac,G., (2004), Fundamentals of Power System economics, John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
2. Hunt,S., (2002), Making competition work in electricity, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
3. Lai,L.L., (2001), Power System Restructuring and Deregulation: Trading, Performance and Information Technology, 

John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Abhyankar,A.R., Khaparde,S.A.,  Restructured Power Systems, NPTEL Course Material, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101005/ 
     

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100 
 



Title Power Quality Mitigation Techniques Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Power Quality (for B.Tech   

students), Power Quality (for M.Tech. students) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an understanding of various techniques and components used to improve the power quality in 
distribution networks 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design topologies and control methods to mitigate power quality disturbances using active and passive filters 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Representation of harmonics, waveform, active, reactive and harmonic power, THD, distortion 
power, power factor (4 lectures) 
Power components in three-phase circuits: 𝛼𝛽0coordinates, instantaneous active and reactive power in three-phase 
balanced circuits, three-phase unbalanced circuit analysis using symmetrical components, power calculation 
in unbalanced and non-sinusoidal three phase systems (6 lectures) 
Fundamentals of load compensation: Power factor improvement, voltage regulation (3 lectures), phase balancing 
using symmetrical components (5 lectures) 
Theory of shunt compensation: State space modeling of compensator, switching control (3 lectures), reactive 
power theory, theory of instantaneous symmetrical components (5 lectures) 
Theory of series compensation: Principle of operation and control of dynamic voltage restorer (6 lectures) 
Unified power quality conditioner: Principle of operation of UPQC (4 lectures) 
Harmonics suppression with passive filters: Types of filters and their design (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Ghosh,A., Ledwich,G., (2002), Power Quality Enhancement Using Custom Power Devices, Springer 

Science+Business Media 
2. Sankaran,C., (2002), Power Quality, CRC Press 
3. Akagi,H., Watanabe,E.H., Aredes,M., (2017), Instantaneous Power Theory and Applications to Power 

Conditioning, Wiley-IEEE Press 

Self Learning Material 
1. Kumar,M.,  Power Quality in Power Distribution Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 

Engineering, IIT Madras, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106025/ 
2. Bhattacharya,A.,  Power Quality Improvement Technique, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical and 

Electronics Engineering, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107157/ 

     
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101 
 



Title Plugin Electric Vehicles Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Introduction to Smart Grid   

(for B.Tech students), Introduction to Smart Grid 
(for M.Tech students) 

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of various technologies of plugin electric vehicle and hybrid electric vehicle and their 
role in smart grid operation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design powertrain circuit topology and appropriate control scheme for electric vehicle 
2.  Understand and design EV charging infrastructure 
 
Contents  
Introduction to EV: Recent development trends, types of electric vehicles (2 lectures) 
Powertrain: Concepts of powertrain sizing in EV and PHEV, starting, braking (6 lectures) 
Storage systems: Battery types, parameters, battery modeling, battery management (5 lectures) 
Charging Infrastructure: Domestic charging infrastructure, public charging infrastructure, normal charging 
station, occasional charging station, fast charging station, battery swapping station (5 lectures), types of 
charging: constant voltage, constant current, pulse charging, inductive, conductive charging (3 lectures) 
Vehicle-to-X systems: Vehicle-to-grid, vehicle-to-home (5 lectures), vehicle-to-building, vehicle-to-vehicle (3 
lectures) 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle: Configuration of HEV (series, parallel, series-parallel & complex), power flow control in 
HEV configurations, control (6 lectures) 
Vehicle Communication: Introduction to in-vehicle communications and controller area network (4 lectures) 
PEV integration: Impact on transmission and distribution network (3 lectures) 
 
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory component: 
SoC estimation, control of electric vehicle drives, regenerative braking, powertrain and vehicle dynamics, EV 
chargers and their control, vehicle-to-grid technology, vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from solar 
PV, performance of aggregator, Use of simulation tools (MATLAB, SIEMENS EV related softwares) to simulate 
different subsystems of EV and different scenarios. 
 
Textbook  
1. Husain,I., (2011), Electric and Hybrid Vehicles Design Fundamentals, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Emadi,A., (2011), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles Fundamentals, 

Theory and Design, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
3. Larminie,J., Lowry,J., (2003), Electric Vehicle Technology Explained, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Jain,A.K.,  Electric Vehicles - Part 1, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102121/ 
2. Kumar,P., Majhi,S., Introduction to Hybrid and Electric Vehicles, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Electronics and Communication Engineering, IIT Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103009/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

102 
 



Title Power System Reliability and Security Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power System Operation and Control (for B.Tech   

students) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide in depth understanding of reliability and security aspects of generation, transmission, and distribution 
systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Develop methods to enhance the reliability of supply and security of power system components 
 
Contents  
Introduction:Concept of power system reliability and security. methods of assessment, cost, probabilistic 
reliability criteria (4 lectures) 
Generating capacity reliability:Probability methods- generation model, loss of load indices, loss of energy indices 
(6 lectures), frequency and duration method- generation model, system risk indices (4 lectures) 
Interconnected systems:Evaluation techniques for multi-interconnected systems, factors affecting emergency 
assistance, frequency and duration method (6 lectures) 
Operating reserve:Various methods of estimation, security function approach, response risk (4 lectures) 
Composite generation and transmission systems:Network configurations, state selection, system and load point 
indices, data requirements (5 lectures) 
Distribution system reliability: Networks configurations, evaluation techniques (5 lectures), indices and factors 
affecting reliability (3 lectures) 
Power system security:Security analysis, security assessment, contingency analysis, algorithms to determine 
system security, security assessment based on performance index (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Billinton,R., Allan,R.N., (1986), Reliability Evaluation of Power Systems, 2nd Edition, Springer US 
2. Billinton,R., Ringlee,R.J., Wood,A.J., (1973), Power-System Reliability Calculations, MIT Press 
3. Singh,C., Jirutitijaroen,P., Mitra,J., (2018), Electric Power Grid Reliability Evaluation: Models and Methods, Wiley-

IEEE Press 
 

 
  

103 
 



Title Selected Topics in Distributed Generation Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Renewable Energy Systems (for   

B.Tech students) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide salient concepts of DG operation and control in both grid connected and autonomous modes 
2.  Provide exposure to the challenges related to stability, grid integration, and ancillary services in distributed 

generation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop control schemes for distributed generators to operate in grid connected and autonomous mode 
2. Understand various challenges and propose solutions related to stability, grid integration and ancillary 

services in distributed generation 
 
Contents  
Distributed generation: Introduction, DG types, concept of inertia and frequency response, flexibility issues, 
ramping issues (3 lectures) 
Control of distributed generation: Typical distributed energy sources (1 lecture), their modelling (5 lectures) and 
control(4 lectures) 
Microgrids: Concept of microgrid, microgrid benefits, typical structures and configurations of various 
microgrids (3 lectures), control of converters in DC and AC microgrids (4 lectures), active and reactive power 
control, voltage and frequency control of inverter-based sources (3 lectures), virtual synchronous generators (2 
lectures) 
Stability: Stability issues with weak grid integration and in microgrid operation (4 lectures) 
Other challenges in grid integration: Power quality requirements, DG support under abnormal grid conditions (3 
lectures), issues related to islanding and reverse power flow, network congestion (5 lectures), and protection 
(2 lectures) 
Ancillary services: Ancillary services with DGs, control for ancillary services, virtual power plants (3 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Willey-IEEE India 

Press 
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
3. Bevrani,H., Francois,B., Ise,T., (2017), Microgrid Dynamics and Control, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 

 
 
  

104 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

VLSI Systems 
 
 
 

  

105 
 



Course Title Hardware Design for Artificial Intelligence Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Core 
Pre-requisite Artificial Intelligence, Digital and Analog   

Design. 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of Hardware Design for Artificial Intelligence. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about architectures and hardware co-design for AI. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply fundamental principles of ANN and DNN to hardware architectures. 
2. Implement the basic designs for computing hardware for AI. 
 
Contents: 
Hardware Design for Artificial-Intelligence: Basics of Artificial Intelligence, Moore’s law in context of AI, Need 
of fast computational resources, Hardware for training, Architectural Challenges for Training, Memory 
Challenges, Floating point accuracy. (4 Lectures) 
Modern AI Hardware: CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs, Specialized accelerators, CPU vs. GPU: Speed, Power and 
Bandwidth. (5 Lectures) 
AI Accelerators and Processors: DNN Accelerators and Architectures, Data reuse, Low-cost spatial architectures, 
Energy efficient dataflow, Datapath Taxonomy, Synchronization for parallel processing.(5 Lectures) 
Computing in AI Hardware: Highly-Parallel Compute Paradigms, High-performance matrix multipliers: Systolic 
arrays; Reinforcement Learning for Hardware Design.(5 Lectures) 
Performance Parameters: Implementation of Deep Learning Kernels; Evaluating Performance, Energy efficiency, 
Parallelism, Locality,Memory hierarchy, Roofline model: Multicore Architectures. (5 Lectures) 
Hardware Optimization for AI: Bitwidth optimization, Nonlinear Quantization, Binary Nets, Log-Domain 
Computation. (5 Lectures) 
Compact Network Architectures: Key Metrics for Embedded DNN, Sparse-Matrix Vector DSP, Compact 
Network Architectures (5 Lectures) 
Industry Standards and State-of-the Art: Study of state-of-the art accelerators such as Eyeriss(MIT), Intel Xeon, 
Intel Neural Compute Stick.(5 Lectures) 
Other accelerators from Microsoft and IBM.(3 Lectures) 
 
Text References 
Sze,V. et al., "Efficient Processing of Deep Neural Networks: A Tutorial and Survey," Proceedings of the IEEE, 
vol. 105, no. 12, pp. 2295-2329, Dec. 2017. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1.  Chen,Y.-H. et al., "Eyeriss: An Energy-Efficient Reconfigurable Accelerator for Deep 
     Convolutional Neural Networks, "IEEE International Conference on Solid-State Circuits           
     (ISSCC), pp. 262-264, February 2016. 
2.  https://www.eecs.mit.edu/academics-admissions/subject-updates-fall-2017/6s0826888 
3.  https://cs217.stanford.edu/ 
4.  https://towardsdatascience.com/neural-network-architectures-156e5bad51ba 

 
Additional Reading 
Zhang,Q.J., Gupta,K.C., Neural Networks for RF and Microwave Design. Artech House Publishers, Boston, MA, 
USA, 2000. 

  

106 
 



Course Title VLSI Testing Number EEL7XX0 
 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite High-level Synthesis, VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of testing and verification techniques used for VLSI integrated circuits. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about complexity of VLSI testing in high-density VLSI chips in present 

scenario. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of VLSI testing and verification for digital designs. 
2. Implement the test patterns and circuitry for reasonably advanced logic circuits. 

 
Contents 
Basics of VLSI Testing: Introduction to Digital VLSI Design flow; VLSI Testing needs and challenges; Review 
of High-Level Synthesis, Scheduling, Allocation and Binding; Basics of VLSI testing, Flow of testing and 
verification; VLSI Testing Process, Equipment and Economics. (6 Lectures) 
Fault Modeling: Faults and fault models, fault detection and redundancy, Yield and Fault Equivalence, Fault 
location, Fault dominance, Fault Simulation. (6 Lectures) 
Automatic test pattern generation: Automatic test pattern generation (ATPG), Combinational ATPG, Sequential 
ATPG. (4 Lectures) 
Design-for-testability: Design-for-testability (DFT), Testability Measures, Scan design, Test interface and 
boundary scan, JTAG, Delay fault testing. (5 Lectures)  
BIST: Built in Self Test (BIST) for testing of logic and memories, Test automation. (3 Lectures) 
New trends in Testing, Testing challenges for SoCs. (4 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. M. Bushnell and V. D. Agrawal, Essentials of Electronic Testing for Digital, Memory and Mixed Signal VLSI 

Circuits. Springer, 2005. 
2. T. Kropf, Introduction to Formal Hardware Verification. Springer Verlag, 2000.  
3. N. H. E. Weste, D. Harris and A. Banerjee, CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective. Pearson, 

3rd edition, 2006. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. M. Abramovici, M. Breuer and A. Friedman, Digital System Testing and Testable Design. IEEE Press, 1994. 
2. NPTEL Course: VLSI Design Verification and Test. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103016/  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

107 
 



 
Course Title Formal Verification Number EEL7XX0 

 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite High-level Synthesis, VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of verification techniques used for VLSI integrated circuits. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about complexity of verification in the high-density VLSI chips in present 

scenario. 
 

Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of formal verification for digital designs in VLSI systems. 
2. Implement the programs for reasonably advanced logic circuits. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Introduction to Digital VLSI Design flow; Needs and challenges of VLSI systems; Review of 
High-Level Synthesis; Basics of VLSI testing and verification, Flow of testing and verification. (4 Lectures) 
Verification: Introduction- Functional verification, Timing verification, Formal verification. (4 Lectures)  
Basics of equivalence checking and model checking, Hardware emulation. (2 Lectures) 
Various Techniques of Verification: Design verification using simulation, analytical and formal techniques. (3 
Lectures)  
Formal equivalence checking, Finite automata and temporal logic, Symbolic trajectory evaluation, term 
rewriting, Verifying clock domain crossings.  (5 Lectures) 
Testbenches: Analog/mixed-signal verification, Assertion Based Verification. (3 Lectures)  
System Verilog assertions, Verification testbenches, Use of verification algorithms. (4 Lectures) 
SoC and CPU verification challenges, New directions in verification. (3 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. M. Bushnell and V. D. Agrawal, Essentials of Electronic Testing for Digital, Memory and Mixed Signal VLSI 

Circuits. Springer, 2005. 
2. T. Kropf, Introduction to Formal Hardware Verification. Springer Verlag, 2000.  
3. N. H. E. Weste, D. Harris and A. Banerjee, CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective. Pearson, 

3rd edition, 2006. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Li.L.; Thornton,M., Digital System Verification: A Combined Formal Methods and Simulation Framework. Morgan 

& Claypool, 2010. 
2. McFarland,M.,C., “Formal Verification of Sequential Hardware: A Tutorial”, IEEE Tran. on Computer-Aided 

Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 12, no. 5 , May 1993. 
3. NPTEL Course: VLSI Design Verification and Test. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103016/ 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

108 
 



Course Title Advanced VLSI Design and Lab Number EEL7XX0 
 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Basic VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of more advanced topics in VLSI Design to have an  overview of VLSI 

subsystems. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about system level issues and trade-offs in chip designs. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design digital circuits for high-speed, low-power applications. 
2. Implement VLSI subsystem designs using memory and arithmetic units. 
 
Contents: 
Introduction: Economics of VLSI systems, Review of CMOS logic circuits; impact of fabrication issues on design, 
ASIC design flow: logic synthesis, placement and routing. (4 Lectures) 
High-speed Logic Circuits: High-speed switching circuits; Advanced clocking strategies and clock distribution; 
Logical effort, high-speed digital logic design using logical effort, performance optimization between speed 
and power. (6 Lectures) 
Low-Power Design Technique: Deep submicron design issues; Leakage components, estimation and leakage 
tolerant design techniques, Subthreshold, Gate, Junction tunneling, GIDL, Diode leakage etc.; Scalability of 
leakage tolerant design techniques; Low-voltage designs including digital subthreshold operations, trade-off 
between high-speed and low-power designs. (6 Lectures) 
Arithmetic and Memory Architectures: Arithmetic building blocks for ALU; Adders, Multipliers, Shifter, Barrel 
Shifter; Introduction to Memories; High performance memory and array structures. (6 Lectures)  
Interconnect-aware Designs: Impact of scaling and interconnects, signal integrity, buffer insertion and inductive 
peaking, Low swing and Current mode signaling, Capacitively coupled interconnects. (6 Lectures) 
 
Lab experiments: It will include designing and optimization of high-speed circuits using logical effort, Low-
power circuits in subthreshold conduction, Memory architectures such as 6T SRAM cell, etc., fast adders and 
multipliers, interconnect aware designs.  
 
Text Books 
1. K. Roy and S. Prasad, Low Voltage, Low Power VLSI Subsystems.McGraw Hill Education, 1st edition, 2017. 
2. I. Sutherland, R. F. Sproull and D. Harris, Logical Effort: Designing Fast CMOS Circuits. Morgan Kaufmann, 

1st edition, 1999. 
3. J. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective, Prentice Hall, 

2nd edition, 2009. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Chandorkar,A.N. et al., Advanced VLSI Design, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,      
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101004/ 
 
Preparatory course material 
Y. Taur and T. Ning, Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices. Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, 2016. 

 
 
 
 

109 
 



Title VLSI Broadband Communication Circuits Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M.Tech. , Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog circuits, Basics of transmission lines,   

fundamentals of continuous time and discrete time 
signals and systems 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the basic understanding of signal degradation linked to broadband circuits. 
2. Develop the ability to design and implement the integrated circuits for broadband communication. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design broadband amplifiers, equalizers, data recovery circuits. 
 
Contents  
Digital signal transmission: Introduction to broadband digital communication, Channel characteristics-
intersymbol interference, eye diagrams [3 lectures] 
Digital communication over wired links, Mesochronous and Plesiochronous links [3 lectures] 
 
Synchronization: Phase detectors for periodic signals and random data: Type I PLL [4 lectures] 
Type II PLL [3 lectures] 
 
Clock and data recovery circuits: Analog and digital implementations of CDRs [4 lectures], 
Design implementation of PLL [3 lectures] 
 
SerDes: Drivers and receivers for low frequencies [3lectures] 
Serializer and Deserializer architectures and circuits [5 Lectures]  
 
Equalization: Need of Linear and non-linear equalizers; LMS adaptation [2 lectures] 
Equalizer design and related issues including noise and crosstalk [5 lectures] 
 
Design challenges: Integrated circuit implementation issues of broadband amplifiers for transmission and 
reception [4 lectures] 
Feedforward and decision feedback equalization [3 lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Y. Tsividis, (2012),Mixed Analog Digital VLSI Devices and Technology (An introduction), World   Scientific, 

New Jersey 
2. K. R. Laker and W.M.C. Sansen, (1994), Design of Analog Integrated Circuits and Systems, McGraw-Hill 
3. BehzadRazavi, (1996), Monolithic Phase Locked Loops and Clock Recovery Circuits-Theory and Design, John 

Wiley & Sons,  
 
Preparatory course material 
1. BehzadRazavi, (2015), Design of Integrated Circuits for Optical Communications,John Wiley & Sons. 
2. David Johns and Ken Martin, (2013), Analog Integrated Circuit Design, John Wiley & Sons. 
 

  

110 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) Specialization 
 

  

111 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Visual Computing Specialization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

112 
 



Title Image Synthesis Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Graphics, Digital Image Processing   

& Probability, Statistics, and Stochastic 
Processes 

Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to fundamentals of realistic image synthesis.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to synthesize realistic looking images for animations, simulation, 
gaming, etc. 
 
Contents  
The Goals of Rendering, Ray Tracing I: Basic Algorithm, Ray-Surface Intersection [4 Lectures]  
Ray Tracing II: Acceleration Techniques [4 Lectures] 
 
The Light Field, Lights and Lighting, Illumination, Camera and Film [4 Lectures] 
Sampling and Reconstruction, Aliasing and Antialiasing, Statistical Sampling [4 Lectures] 
 
Reflection Models: BRDFs, Ideal Specular and Diffuse [2 Lectures]   
Reflection Models II: Glossy, Texture, the Rendering Equation [4 Lectures]  
Materials and BRDFs, Mapping techniques, Exotic materials [4 Lectures] 
 
Monte Carlo Methods: Probability, Sampling and Variance Reduction [3 Lectures]  
Sampling Paths, Irradiance Caching and Photon Maps [5 Lectures] 
Radiosity: Form Factors, Solvers [4 Lectures]  
Meshing and Hierarchical Techniques [4 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Akenine-Möller, T., Haines, E., & Hoffman, N. (2019). Real-time rendering. Crc Press. 
2. Hughes, J. F., Van Dam, A., Foley, J. D., McGuire, M., Feiner, S. K., & Sklar, D. F. (2014). Computer graphics: 

principles and practice. Pearson Education.  
3. Cohen, M. F., & Wallace, J. R. (2012). Radiosity and realistic image synthesis. Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Pat Hanrahan, Computer Graphics: Image Synthesis Techniques, Stanford University: 

https://graphics.stanford.edu/courses/cs348b-00/ 
2. Prof. Ravi Raviramamoorthi, Computer Graphics, University of California, San Diego,  

https://www.youtube.com/user/raviramamoorthi/videos   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

113 
 



Title Animation Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering, CSE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Graphics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to fundamentals of animation and simulation.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to use the animation techniques for physics based real time 
systems.  
 
Contents  
Core mathematics and methods for computer animation and motion simulation. [3 Lectures]  
Traditional animation techniques. [3 Lectures] 
 
Physics-based simulation methods for modeling shape and motion:  
Particle systems, constraints, rigid bodies, [4 Lectures] 
Deformable models, collisions and contact [4 Lectures] 
Fluids, and fracture. [4 Lectures]  
Animating natural phenomena. [4 Lectures] 
 
Methods for animating virtual characters and crowds [4 Lectures] 
Data-driven animation methods, realism and perception [4 Lectures] 
Animation systems, motion control [4 Lectures] 
Real-time and interactive methods [3 Lectures] 
Multi-sensory feedback. [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Hughes, J. F., Van Dam, A., Foley, J. D., McGuire, M., Feiner, S. K., & Sklar, D. F. (2014). Computer graphics: 

principles and practice. Pearson Education. 
2. Parent, R. (2012). Computer animation: algorithms and techniques. Newnes. 
3. Marschner, S., & Shirley, P. (2015). Fundamentals of computer graphics. CRC Press. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Doug James, Computer Graphics: Animation and Simulation, Stanford University, 
https://graphics.stanford.edu/courses/cs348b-00/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

114 
 



Title Computational Photography Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department EE, CSE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Image Processing   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the computational photography fundamentals.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design efficient algorithms for problems such as motion 
deblurring, compositing, warping and use computational cameras for intelligent sensing.  
 
Contents  
Modern optics and lenses;Radiometry and Photometry [3 lectures] 
Camera models, aperture, shutter and energy calculations motion and defocus blur [2 Lectures] 
Epsilon Photography, Single-shot Multi-domain Camera.  [4 Lectures] 
Computational Illumination: dual photography, relighting [4 Lectures] 
Retrographic Sensing for the Measurement of Surface Texture and Shape. [5 Lectures] 
Lightfields, Cameras for human-computer interaction, [3 Lectures] 
Wavelengths and colors, Hyperspectral Imaging Techniques [3 Lectures] 
Thermal cameras, high-speed [2 Lectures] 
3D range-sensing cameras and camera arrays. [4 Lectures] 
Removing camera shake and motion blur, Coded Aperture [4 Lectures] 
Color manipulation, Image compositing [3 Lectures] 
Panoramas, Warping and morphing, Motion Magnification.  [5 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, by Richard Szeliski. 
2. Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision, by Richard Hartley and Andrew Zisserman. 
3. Reinhard, E., Heidrich, W., Debevec, P., Pattanaik, S., Ward, G., & Myszkowski, K. (2010). High dynamic 

range imaging: acquisition, display, and image-based lighting. Morgan Kaufmann. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Ramesh Raskar, Computational Camera and Photography, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 

https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/media-arts-and-sciences/mas-531-computational-camera-and-photography-
fall-2009/index.htm 

2. Prof.Ioannis (Yannis) Gkioulekas, Computational Photography, Carnegie Mellon University: 
http://graphics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/15-463/  

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

115 
 



Title Visual Perception Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the fundamentals for Visual Perception.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability of applying visual perception concepts to advance technologies 
of AR/VR, rendering, visualization, and and human computer interaction. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Optical Information, Visual System [3 Lectures] 
Perceiving Objects and Color [3 Lectures]  
Visual System: Spatial Vision Perceiving Objects, Color[4 Lectures] 
Depth and Movements [4 Lectures]  
Spatial Vision:  Perceiving Depth and Size, Perceiving Movement [5 Lectures] 
Perceiving Scenes [3 Lectures]  
Perception Functions and Categories [5 Lectures]  
Visual Attention [5 Lectures]  
Visual Memory [2 Lectures]  
Applications  in Image Synthesis, AR/VR [4 Lectures] 
Rendering, and Visualization [4 Lectures]   
 
Textbooks 
1. Goldstein, E. Bruce, and James Brockmole (2016). Sensation and perception. Cengage Learning. 
2. Gordon, Ian E. Theories of visual perception (2004). Psychology press. 
3. DeValois, Russell L., and Karen K. DeValois (1990). Spatial vision. Oxford university press. 
4. Davies, E. R. (2004). Machine vision: theory, algorithms, practicalities. Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Aditi Majumder, Visual Perception, University of California, Irvine, 
https://www.ics.uci.edu/~majumder/vispercep/vispercep.htm 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

116 
 



Title Image and Video Forensics Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Image Processing & Probability,   

Statistics, and Stochastic Processes 
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Introduce the framework of Image and Video Forensics. 
2. Discuss the various techniques for forgery detection in Images and Videos. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:   
Design an appropriate method for forgery detection based on available information. 
 
 
Contents   
Image and Video Forgeries [3 Lectures]: Image formation, Types of Image and Video Forgery, Splicing, Copy-
Move, Retouching, Deep Fakes. 
Camera Finger-printing [7 Lectures]: 
 Camera Response Function, Noise [3 Lectures] 
Camera Signature,Camera Parameters based detection. [4 Lectures] 
Coding based Techniques [7 Lectures]:  
Image and Video Coding, Coding Priors, Compression Signatures [4 Lectures] 
Frame based analysis (insertion, deletion, replication, shuffling), Audio Analysis. [3 Lectures] 
Scene/Feature based Techniques [17 Lectures]:  
Gradients, Motion, Motion Blur, Defocus Blur, Depth, Noise [5 Lectures] 
Graph Matching, Illumination,  Shadow, scene-Audio correlation [4 Lectures] 
Various Priors (Color, Gradients, Natural Image) [4 Lectures] 
Transform domain features.[4 Lectures] 
Deep Fakes [7 Lectures]:  
Counter Forensics, Adversarial Network, Deep Fakes [4 Lectures] 
Motion-Audio Synchronization, Cloud based detection framework. [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Farid, H. (2016). Photo forensics. MIT Press.  
2. Sencar, H. T., &Memon, N. (2013). Digital image forensics. Counter-forensics: attacking image forensics, 327-

366. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Rita Singh, Computational Forensics and Investigative Intelligence, Carnegie Mellon University, 
http://forensics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/spring2018/schedule.html 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

117 
 



Title 3D Shape Analysis Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization 

Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier Analysis, Linear Algebra   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of differential geometry tools isometry, geodesics, Laplace Beltrami 
Operator, and Functional Maps.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply the learned geometry tools to solve practical 3D surface reconstruction problem. 
2. generate 3D printable models from the unstructured point clouds. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Differential Geometry [5 Lectures]: Basics of differential geometry of curve and surfaces and 
estimating the quantities such as normal and curvature.   
Surface Representation and Reconstruction [9 Lectures]: 3D Surface Representation, Parametric and Non-
parametric, Implicit, Signed Distance Function [3 Lectures] 
Data structures for surface representation [1 Lectures] 
3D surface reconstruction from point clouds. [5 Lectures] 
Shape Analysis Tools [12 Lectures]:   
Isometry, geodesics on triangle meshes [4 Lectures] 
Scalar functions on shapes, discrete Laplace Beltrami operator [5 Lectures] 
Heat Diffusion on Shapes [3 Lectures] 
Shape Matching [12 Lectures]:  
3D Shape Descriptors, Rigid and Non-rigid registration [5 Lectures] 
Functional Maps, 3D Shape correspondences [5 Lectures] 
Intrinsic Symmetry [2 Lectures] 
Shape Repairing [4 Lectures]: Shape completion, generating printable 3D models from raw point clouds 
 
Textbooks  
1. Botsch, M., Kobbelt, L., Pauly, M., Alliez, P., &Lévy, B. (2010). Polygon mesh processing. CRC press. 
2. Solomon, J. (2015). Numerical algorithms: methods for computer vision, machine learning, and graphics. 

CRC press. 
3. O'neill, B. (2006). Elementary differential geometry. Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Prof. Justin Solomon, Shape Analysis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 

http://groups.csail.mit.edu/gdpgroup/6838_spring_2019.html 
2. Prof. Siddhartha Chaudhuri, Digital Geometry Processing, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay: 

https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~cs749/spr2017/ 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Prof. Gilbert Strang,Linear Algebra and Learning from Data, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 

https://math.mit.edu/~gs/learningfromdata/ 
 
  

118 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Socio-Digital Reality 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

119 
 



Title Multimodal Interface Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–4 [2] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Core 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the multimodal signals and interfaces.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design multimodal interface applications. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to principles of Multimodal Interfaces (2) 
Basic haptic rendering and perception experiments using haptic interfaces (3) 
AR and VR models (3) 
EEG (1) 
Eye Tracker (1) 
Gesture (Kinect) (2) 
Audio Assistance (2) 
 
Textbooks 
1. A. Bhardwaj and S. Chaudhuri, “Kinesthetic Perception: A Machine Learning Approach”, Springer 

Publishers, 2017. 
2. MC Lin and MA Otaduy (Eds), “Haptic Rendering: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications”, AK Peters, 

Ltd; London: 2008. 
3. Aukstakalnis, Steve. Practical augmented reality: A guide to the technologies, applications, and human 

factors for AR and VR. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2016. 
 
Self Learning Material  
 
1. Prof. Gordon Wetzstein, Virtual Reality, Stanford University, https://stanford.edu/class/ee267/ 
2. Prof. Allison Okamura, Design and Control of Haptic Systems, Stanford University, 

http://web.stanford.edu/class/me327/ 
 

  

120 
 



Title Speech Understanding Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to basic concepts and techniques that help constitute speech 
understanding 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design systems that can process speech signals with the goal 
of extracting useful semantic signal information. 

Contents  
Automatic Speech Recognition: HMMs for Acoustic Modeling [3 Lectures]  
HMMs and Weighted Finite-State Transducers  (WFSTs), WFSTs for Speech Understanding and  Recognition,  
Basics of speech production, Tied-state HMMs [5 Lectures ] 
Feature analysis for Speech Understanding [2 Lectures] 
Viterbi decoding algorithm and the Baum-Welch training algorithm [3 Lectures] 
Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs), context-dependent triphones for acoustic modelling [5 lectures] 
Introduction to NN-based Acoustic Modeling, RNN-based models [4 Lectures] 
Natural Language Processing: Word structure, semantics (lexical semantics, WordNet and WordNet based 
similarity measures) [5 lectures] 
Classical parsing, parsing using Probabilistic Context Free Grammars and EM based approaches [5 lectures] 
Language Modelling (basic ideas, smoothing techniques), RNN-based language models [4 lectures] 
Distributional word representation, Supervised sentiment analysis [3 lectures] 
Natural language inference [3 lectures] 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Gales, M., & Young, S. (2008). The application of hidden Markov models in speech recognition. Foundations 

and Trends® in Signal Processing, 1(3), 195-304. 
2. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin (2009). Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural 

Language Processing, Speech Recognition, and Computational Linguistics. 2nd edition. Prentice-Hall. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Bill MacCartney, Natural language understanding, Stanford 

University,https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs224u/ 
2. Prof. Preethi Jyothi, Automatic Speech Recognition, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 

https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~pjyothi/cs753/index.html 
 

121 
 



 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2nd year B.Tech Computer Science & 
Engineering 

Curriculum Structure 
August 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2nd year B.Tech Computer Science & Engineering 
Curriculum Structure 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



1. Introduction 

Traditional curriculum in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) has focused on two major areas, i.e., theory 
and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of the era of Edge 
Computing, Cloud Computing, Security, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed by the 
incorporation of new emerging technologies. The discipline is becoming instrumental in solving major real-world 
problems faced by modern society such as healthcare, security, sustainability, and socio-economic challenges. 
There is a need to revamp the B.Tech program in CSE so as to prepare students to tackle problems which are 
fundamentally multidisciplinary in nature. This would improve IIT Jodhpur’s participation and contribution 
towards providing solutions for global challenges. IIT Jodhpur can become a leading source of technology 
solutions for self-reliant India. 
 
 
2. Objectives of the Program 

The objective of the B.Tech. program in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur is to equip 
students to undertake careers involving challenges of working on real-world problems, while innovating with 
their core competency in computer science. The curriculum gives due importance to the foundational aspects of 
computer science, as well as develops in students the necessary engineering skills for addressing emerging 
technological challenges. The program offers flexibility in choosing elective courses for widening the 
understanding of emerging concepts and processes in different domains. Students can opt for specializations 
which provide a coherent and increasingly sophisticated understanding so as to enable them to pursue preferred 
career opportunities. The program will produce a well prepared and well-motivated workforce to undertake 
careers in research and industry involving innovation, knowledge creation, engineering, and entrepreneurship.  
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 

After completing this program, a student will be able to develop an ability to: 
1. Apply appropriate knowledge in Computer Science and Engineering to identify, formulate, analyze, and solve 

complex engineering problems in order to reach substantive conclusions. 
2. Self-learn and engage in use of advanced computing tools. 
3. Develop sustainable computing solutions in broader economic, societal and environmental contexts. 
4. Think critically, creatively and analytically as a computer scientist, whilst being able to work effectively, 

independently and collaboratively as part of a team in research, technology development and entrepreneurial 
ventures.  

5. Apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories. 
6. Effectively communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms. 
7. Be motivated to engage in independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of evolving technological 

challenges.  
 

4. Learning Outcomes 

The student will have the ability to: 
1. Abstract out computational models based on mathematical rigor.  
2. Critically analyse and appreciate emerging and applied fields of computer science owing to deeper 

understanding and strong foundations in theoretical computer science. 
3. Develop robust, secure, and efficient software systems that would involve software engineering, data 

structures, and algorithm design paradigms. 
4. Apply different concepts including digital design, computer architecture, operating systems, databases, 

networking, and applications for building solutions for real-world problems. 
5. Design and implement smart, intelligent, and user friendly interfaces for computer applications.  
6. Analyse, design, develop and deploy computer based systems in collaboration with domain experts for 

meeting societal needs in areas such as healthcare, safety, environment, law enforcement, transportation, etc., 
by exploiting tools and techniques of Big data, AI and project management. 

7. Become proficient in some of the specialized areas such as Computer Vision, Augmented Reality, Internet of 
Things, Natural Language Understanding, and Intelligent Communication. 

1 
 



8. Communicate effectively by comprehending, documenting, making effective presentations and exchanging 
clear instructions. 
 

5. New Skill Sets Targeted 

1. Designing user-centric human-machine interfaces 
2. Designing end-to-end socio-digital reality systems 
3. Developing sustainable computing solutions 
4. Building secure, intelligent, and trustable systems  
5. Designing and synthesizing digital systems for solving industrial problems 
 
6. Topic Clouds and Mapping of Topic Clouds with Proposed Courses 

Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 

Area Topics Category Course (IE/IS/ 
(Core/ PC/PE) 
Techniques 
Technology/ 
Systems) 

Theory Computing Paradigms, Syntax, Semantics Specification,  Core Principles of 
and Attribute Grammar, Imperative Programming, Procedures, Programming 

Algorithms Modules, Object-oriented Programming, Abstraction, Languages 
Encapsulation, Reuse, Functional Programming, Polymorphic (PC) 
Data Types, Recursion, Lambda Calculus, Logic Programming, 
Horn Clauses, Backtracking, Concurrent Programming, 
Synchronization, Multithreads 

Abstract Data Types, Linear Data Structures, Non Linear Data Core Data 
Structures, Stack, Queue, Link List, Heap, Sorting, Hashing, Structures and 
Algorithm Analysis, Graph, Tree Algorithms 

(PC) 

Complexity Analysis, Divide-and-conquer, Greedy Core Design and 
Algorithms, Dynamic Programming, Linear Programming, Analysis of 
Universal Hashing, Approximation Algorithms, Randomized Algorithms 
Algorithms (PC) 

Discrete Structures, Logics, Set, Graph and Trees, Deterministic Core Maths for 
Finite Automata, Non-deterministic Finite Automata, Computing 
PushDown Automata, Context Free Grammar, Turing (PC) 
Machine, Lexical and Syntax Analysis, Parsing 

Computability, Decision Trees and Communication Core Theory of 
Complexity, Time Complexity, Space Complexity, Complexity Computation 
of Counting and Randomization (PE) 

Graph algorithms, Directed and Undirected graph, Planar Core Graph 
graph, Graph coloring, Hamiltonion and Eulorian graph, Theoretic 
Bipartite graphs, Trees. Algorithms 

(PC Bouquet) 

NP-Hard problems, Bounded Search Tree, Iterative Core Parameterized 
Compression, Randomized Methods, Kernelization, Sunflower Complexity 
Lemma, Crown Decomposition, Expansion Lemma, (PC Bouquet) 
Intractability 

2 
 



Persistence DS, Retroactive DS, Geometric DS, DS for Moving Core and Advanced 
Data, Dynamic Optimality, Cache-oblivious DS, van Emde Techniques Data 
Boas, Sketching, String DS, Low Memory DS, Dynamic Graphs Structures (PE) 

Euclidean TSP, Metric TSP, FPTAS, PTAS, Primal-Dual Techniques Approximatio
Schema, Dual Fitting, Embeddings, Sparsest Cut, Random n Algorithms 
Hyperplanes, Hashing, Makespan (PE) 

Randomized Complexity Classes, Probabilistic Analysis, Techniques Randomized 
Markov Chain, Random Walk, Randomized Graph Algorithms 
Algorithms, Randomized Sorting and Searching, Markov, (PE) 
Chebyshev, Chernoff 

Computational Model and Complexity Classes, NP, NP Core Complexity 
Completeness, Complexity Issues in Cryptography, Lower Theory (PE) 
Bounds, Algebraic Computational Model, Levin’s Theory, 
Hardness Amplification, Logic in complexity theory, Circuit 
Lower Bounds 

Complex Numbers, Complex Vector Spaces, Quantum Core Quantum 
Algorithms, Quantum Programming Languages, Quantum Computing 
Cryptography, Quantum Information Theory, Deutsch’s (PE) 
Algorithm, Simon’s Periodicity Algorithm, Grover’s Search 
Algorithm, The Deutsch–Jozsa Algorithm, Shor’s Factoring 
Algorithm, Quantum Assembly Programming, Quantum Key 
Exchange, Quantum Teleportation, von Neumann Entropy  

Streaming Algorithms, Stream mining using Clustering, Core and Stream 
Massive Data Clustering, Data Stream Classification, Technique Analytics (PE) 
Distributed Mining of Streaming Data, Change Diagnosis, 
Forecasting on Stream, Dimensionality Reduction for 
Streaming data.  

Hardware Introduction to HDL, Design flow, Number representation, Core Digital Design 
Arithmetic circuits, Design and Analysis of Synchronous (PC) 
circuits, Design of Finite State Machines, CMOS Technology, 
Programmable Logic Devices, CAD 

CPU, Memory, Processor, Instruction set Architecture, I/O, Core Computer 
ALU, Bus Architecture, Cache management, Performance Architecture 

(PC) 

Embedded system design, Architectures of embedded Systems Embedded 
processors, Hardware-Software Co-design, ARM Cortex M3, Systems (PC 
Programming for Embedded Systems, Real time OS, Bouquet) 
Distributed Embedded Architectures, Real time scheduling 
algorithms, Multi-rate systems 

VLSI design flow, hardware modelling principles, hardware Technique High-level 
description, Behavioural synthesis, logic optimization and Synthesis (PE) 
synthesis, Chip architectures, standard cells and FPGA, 
Synthesis tools, layout synthesis 

3 
 



Systems Processes Management, Process Coordination, Deadlock,  Core Operating 
Memory Management, Storage Management, Protection and Systems  (PC) 
Security 

Database Architectures, Data Granularity, ER Model, EER Core Database 
Model, Relational Model, Relational Algebra, Relational Systems (PC) 
Calculus, SQL, Schema, Query, Data Definition, Data 
Manipulation, Data Retrieval, Views, Normalization, 
Functional Dependency, Transactions, Schedules, ACID 
Properties, Concurrency Control, Recoverability, 
Serializability, Deadlock Prevention, Locking Protocols, 
Timestamp Protocols, Deadlock Detection, Recovery Protocols, 
Query Optimization, Hashing, Indexing 

Software Development Life Cycle, Software Engineering Core Software 
Process Model, Software Design, UML, Design Pattern, Project Engineering 
Management, Cost Analysis, UI Design, Service Oriented (PC) 
Architecture, Software Quality, Risk Analysis, Agile 
Methodologies, Software Architecture 

Software Testing, Quality Engineering, Testing Process, Techniques Software 
Automatic Testing, Unit Testing, Defect Prevention, Process Testing and 
Improvement, Quantifiable Quality Improvement, Quality Quality 
Model and Measurements, Defect Classification, Reliability Assurance (PE) 
Engineering  

Distributed Systems, Centralized Systems, Data Transparency, Systems Distributed 
Data Fragmentation, Data Allocation, Security, Semantic Database 
Integrity, Query Decomposition, Query Localization, Query Systems (PE) 
Ordering, Query Optimization, Transaction Management, 
Concurrency Control, Deadlock Management, Reliability, 
Recovery Protocols 

Fog Computing, Internet of Things and Analytics, Edge Systems Edge and Fog 
Computing, Distributed computing and system design, Computing 
architecture, contemporary cloud framework, distributed data (PE) 
& processing management, middleware design issues and 
challenges, Edge & Fog for AI-driven applications  

Concurrency, events & ordering, distributed file systems, Systems Distributed 
distributed disk management, fault tolerance, microkernel, Systems (PE) 
operating system kernel 

 Understanding Software & Evolution, Software Maintenance, Systems Software 
Software Reuse, Reverse engineering levels & techniques Maintenance 

(PE) 

Network Cyber Security Vulnerabilities and Cyber Security Safeguards, Core Cyber Security 
and Securing Web Application, Services and Servers, Intrusion (PC) 
Security Detection and Prevention, Firewalls, Cyberspace and the Law, 

Cyber Forensics 

OSI reference model, Packet switching techniques, Core Computer 
Performance metrics, Socket programming, Email, FTP, Telnet, Networks (PC) 
SSH, DNS, TCP, UDP, Transmission, Flow and Congestion 
Control, Tunneling, Internet Protocol and its operation, 
Routing algorithms, ICMP, ARP, RARP, DHCP, IPv6, RIP, 

4 
 



OSPF, Advanced Internetworking, Multicast routing, framing, 
medium access mechanism, Public key and private key 
cryptography,  Firewalls, SDN Overview. 

Overview about MANETs, VANETs, WSNs and WMNs, Systems Introduction to 
Modulation techniques at PHY layer, Fading mitigation Wireless Ad 
techniques, MAC protocols for MANETs, Error correcting hoc Network 
codes, distributed wireless routing algorithms, transport level (PE) 
mobility management, 5G overview, LPWAN, Bluetooth 

Digital Trust, Digital Asset, Digital Transactions, Distributed Technology Introduction to 
Ledger Technology, Digital Signature, Cryptocurrency, Blockchain 
Bitcoin, Hyperledger, Ethereum Interaction, Blockchain-as-a- (PE) 
service, Blockchain Use Cases, Blockchain Security 

Cooperative    Vehicular Safety Applications, Vehicular Systems Vehicular Ad-
Mobility Modeling, Physical Layer Considerations for Hoc Networks 
Vehicular Communications, MAC Layer of Vehicular (PE) 
Communication Networks, VANET Routing protocols, 
Emerging VANET Applications, Standards and Regulations 

Overview of wireless systems, Multiplexing, Link adaptation, Technology Mobile and 
Multihop routing protocols, Mobility and Handoff Pervasive 
management, Cellular Technologies, Overview of LTE and 5G Computing 
Cellular Networks, 5G Architecture, RAN and dynamic (PE) 
CRAN, Mobility management and Network slicing in 5G, 
Pervasive computing, Context aware sensor networks, 
Localization, Android architecture and Overview, Body area 
networks 

4G LTE networks, From 4G to 5G, 5G overview,  core, Technology 5G Mobile 
signalling, 5G mobile edge and fog computing, application, 5G Networks (PE) 
vs mm-wave WiFi, India’s 5G policy and vision, 6G vision, 
paper discussions  

Networking basics, switching architecture, SDN architectures, Core Software 
OpenFlow, Network function virtualization, Emerging SDN Defined 
models, Data center networking Networks (PE) 

Basic symmetric-key encryption, Message integrity, Public key Core Cryptography 
cryptography, Digital signatures ,Protocols and Network 

security (PE) 

 Bayes Decision Theory, Regression, Bias variance, Maximum Core and Pattern 
Applicatio Likelihood Estimation, Bayesian Parameter Estimation, Technique Recognition 
ns Decision Tree, Random Forest, Artificial Neural Network, and Machine 

Clustering, k-means, SVM, Feature Selection, Dimensionality Learning (PC) 
Reduction 

Uninformed Search Strategies, Informed Search Strategies, Technique Artificial 
Local Search Algorithms, Hill Climbing, Constraint Intelligence 
Satisfaction Problems, Backtracking, Adversarial Search, Min- (PE) 
Max algorithms, Propositional Logic, Reasoning Patterns, 
First-order logic, Syntax, Semantics, Q-value, Policy,  

5 
 



Search Engine Architecture, Retrieval Models, Performance Techniques Information 
Evaluation, Text Categorization, Text Clustering, Web Retrieval (PE) 
Information Retrieval, Structured Document Retrieval  

Visual World, Geometry, Lights and Optics, Tracking, Technique Introduction to 
Motion, Depth, Devices and tools AR and VR 

(PE) 

Geometric primitives, Clipping, Viewing, Rendering, Technique Computer 
Animation, Shading, Coloring, OpenGL Graphics (PE) 

Eye and early vision, Reasoning systems, Late vision, visual Technique Principles of 
attention, Cognitive architectures, Knowledge representation Biological 
and learning, Neural networks for vision, Applications in Vision and 
vision tasks Applications 

(PE) 

Image formation and transformations, Camera calibration, Technique Computer 
Image restoration, Spatial and Wavelet-based processing, Vision (PE) 
Epipolar Geometry, SfM, Optical flow, Key-point detection, 
Feature description and matching, Deep learning for vision, 
Applications 

Data storage methods, data access methods, analysis, Technique Data 
representation, visualization, visual storytelling, Dashboard, Visualization 
Infographics (PE) 

Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Optimization, Technique Deep Learning 
Regularization, Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural Network, (PE) 
Recurrent Neural Network, LSTM, Deep Generative Models, 
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Belief Network, 
Deep Convolutional GAN, Variational Autoencoder, 
Representation Learning, Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer 
Learning, Distributed Representation, Domain Adaptation, 
Neural Language Model, Adversarial Learning 

Kernel Machines, Variants of Support Vector Machines, PAC Core and Advanced 
Theory, Boosting, Graphical Models, Structural Predictions, Technique Machine 
Deep Reinforcement Learning, Space Coding Learning (PE) 

Decision-making, Utility Theory, Utility Functions, Decision Core Advanced 
Networks, Sequential Decision Problems, Partially Observable Artificial 
MDP, Game Theory, Reinforcement Learning, Generalization, Intelligence  
Policy Search, Hidden Markov Model, Kalman Filter, (PE) 
Knowledge Representation,  Ontological Engineering, 
Situation Calculus, Semantic Networks, Description Logic, 
Planning graphs, Partial-order Planning, Conditional 
Planning, Continuous Planning, Multi-agent Planning, 
Hierarchical Task Network Planning, Non-deterministic 
Domains 

Neuromorphic Engineering, Neuroanatomy of human brain, Technique Neuromorphic 
Neuron models, Plasticity rules, Learning rules, Spiking Design and 
Neural Networks (SNN), Nanodevices for Neuron Computing 
Implementation, Synaptic emulation, Electronic synapses, (PE) 
Digital/Analog neuromorphic VLSI, Hardware 
implementation of synaptic circuits, Synaptic programming 

6 
 



Accuracy-explainability tradeoff, Interpretability problem, Technique Dependable 
Predictability, Transparency, Traceability, Causality, Artificial 
Reasoning, Attention and Saliency, Interpretable AI, Prediction Intelligence 
Consistency, Adversarial Robustness, Trustworthy AI, (PE) 
Integrity, Reproducibility, Accountability, Bias-free AI, Ethics 
in AI 

Fuzzy Computing, Fuzzy Systems, Neural Computing, Genetic Technique Soft 
Algorithms, Rough Sets, Knowledge Representations, Computing 
Fuzzification, Defuzzification, Swarm Intelligence, Hybrid Techniques 
Models, Neuro-fuzzy systems, Rough-neural computing (PE) 

Biological Signals, Biomedical Imaging Modalities, ECG, NMR Technique Bio-image 
spectroscopy, electron microscopy, MRI, and X-Ray Images, Computing 
Visualization, Reconstruction, Restoration, Clustering, Graph (PE) 
Partitioning, Deep Learning for Bio-image 

Biometric Devices, Biometric System Design, Biometric Data Technique Advanced 
Analysis, Face Recognition, Fingerprint Matching, Signature Biometrics 
Authentication, Biometric  (PE) 

Computational complexity of AI models, Prediction accuracy, Systems and Resource-
Numeric accuracy, Precision, Memory footprints, Edge AI, Technique Constrained 
Memory Optimization of Models, Hardware accelerators for Artificial 
Edge AI, Vision Processing Unit, Streaming Hybrid Intelligence 
Architecture Vector Engine, Open Neural Network Exchange  (PE) 

Word representation, NLP tasks, Seq2Seq model, Question Technique Natural 
Answering, Sentiment Analysis, Dialogue system, Machine Language 
Translation, natural language generation Interpretability, Understanding 
Knowledge Graphs.  (PE)  

Spoken language technology, dialog and conversational Techniques Speech 
systems, automatic speech recognition, speech synthesis, affect Understanding 
detection, dialogue management. (PE)  

Graphs, Network Models, Network Data Generation, Technique Social 
Structural Properties, Link Prediction, Community Detection, Networks (PE) 
Information Cascade, Small World Phenomenon, Homophily, 
Structural Balance, Components, Network Evolution, Multi-
layer network 

  
 

  

7 
 



7. Course Categories, Credit Distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 

Table 2. Proposed Course Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes  

S.N Course Type Course Category Regular B.Tech. Double 
. B.Tech. 

Credit Total Credit Total 

1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 
  

Science (IS) 16 16 

Humanities (IH) 12 9 

2 Programme Linked Science (LS) 7 0 
(L) 

3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 51 71 51 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 17 17 

B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 

5 Engineering Science Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 22 22 
(E) 

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8 8 

Total Graded 150  160 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 

Engineering (NE) 3 3 

Design/Practical Experience (ND) 6 6 

Total Graded + Non-Graded  165  175 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 



8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 

Table 3. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up 6000 Level) 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact Total Credits 
hours (TC=TH/3) 

Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours 
(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1 

1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 



9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 

Table 4. Programme Compulsory Courses 

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 

1 Data Structure and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 

 2 Maths for Computing 3-1-0 4 4 

3 Digital Design  2-0-2 4 3 

4 Human-Machine Interaction 0-0-4 4 2 

5 Software Engineering 3-0-2  5 4 

6 Operating Systems 3-0-2 5 4 

7  Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3-1-0 4 4 

8 Computer Architecture  3-0-0 3 3 

9 Database Systems 3-0-2 5 4 

10 Cyber Security 3-0-2 5 4 

11 Computer Networks 3-0-3 5 4.5 

12 Digital Systems LAB  0-0-3 3 1.5 

13  Principles of Programming Languages 3-0-0 3 3 

14a Randomized Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3 

14b Approximation Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3 

14c Distributed Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3 

14d Optimization (B1) 3-0-2 5 4 

15a VLSI Design (B2) 3-0-0 3 3 

15b High-Level Synthesis (B2) 3-0-0 3 3 

15c Embedded Systems (B2) 3-0-0 3 3 

Total 51/52 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 



10. Area-wise Programme Elective Courses 

Table 5. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses 

S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P 

1 Theory and 1. Randomized Algorithms (700) 3-0-0 
Algorithms 2. Approximation Algorithms (700)   

3. Complexity Theory (400) 
4. Advanced Data Structures (400) 
5. Quantum Computing (400) 
6. Graph-theoretic Algorithms (700) 
7. Parameterized Complexity (700) 
8. Optimization (Math) (400) 

2 Hardware  1. High-level Synthesis (EE/CS)(700) 3-0-0 
2. Embedded Systems (EE)   

3. VLSI Design (EE) 
4. Hardware Software Co-Design (CS) (700) 

3 Systems 1. Software Testing and Quality Assurance (700) 3-0-0 
2. Distributed Database Systems (700)  
3. Distributed Systems (2-0-0) (400)  
4. Mobile and Pervasive Computing (700)  
5. Virtualization and Cloud Computing (700)  
6. Compiler Design (700)  
7. Software Maintenance (400)   2-0-2 

4 Network and 1. Introduction to Wireless Ad hoc Network (700) 3-0-0 
Security 2. 5G Mobile Networks(CS)(700)  

3. Software Defined Networks (CS)(700) 2-0-0 

4. Intelligent Radio Networks (EE) (700) 3-0-2 

5. Data Communication Networks (EE) (300) 
6. Cryptography and Network Security (CS/EE) (400) 
7. Introduction to Blockchain (700) 

5 AI-ML 1. Deep Learning (400) 3-0-0 
 2. Artificial Intelligence (400)     

3. Advanced Machine Learning 
4. Dependable Artificial Intelligence (400) 
5. Information Retrieval (700) 
6. Autonomous Systems (IDRP) (400) 
7. Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulation in AI (700) 
8. Planning and Decision making for Robots 

(IDRP)(700) 

6 Speech,Text, 1. Natural Language Understanding (700)  3-0-0 
and Vision 2. Digital Image Processing (400) 
  3. Computer Vision (400) 

4. Computer Graphics (400) 
5. Speech Understanding (700) 

11 
 



7 Social 1. Social Computing  3-0-0 
Computing 2. Sustainable Computing  3-0-0 

3. ICT for Development  2-0-0 
4. Machine Learning for Epidemiology  3-0-0 
5. Health Informatics  3-0-0 
6. Computational Social Choice  3-0-0 
7. Computational Cognition & Behavior Modelling 3-0-0 
8. Social Networks  3-0-0 
9. Ethics, policy, law and regulations in AI 0-0-2 
10. Crowd-sourcing and human computing 3-0-0 
11. Environmental Informatics 3-0-0 
12. Computational Microeconomics 3-0-0 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 



11. Specializations  Offered by the Department 
Table 6. Specializations and courses 

Name of Specialization Core (8 
S. No. Specialization Elective (12 Credits) 

Specialization Credits) 

Visual Computing 
1. Jointly with EE and AIDE Jointly with EE and AIDE 

(CSE, AIDE, EE) 

Socio-Digital Reality 
2. Jointly with EE and AIDE Jointly with EE and AIDE   

(CS, AIDE, EE) 

Randomized Algorithms, Approximation 
Advanced Data Structures Algorithms, Theory of Computation,  

Advanced (3-0-0), Complexity Theory Distributed Algorithms, Quantum 
3. 

Algorithms  (3-0-0), Algorithms for Big Computing (IDRP), Optimization, Graph 
Data (from M.Tech, 2-0-0) Theory and Applications, Parameterized 

Complexity 

Machine Learning for Epidemiology (3-0-
0), Health Informatics (3-0-0), 
Computational Social Choice (3-0-0), 

Social Computing (3-0-0), 
Computational Cognition & Behavior 

Social and  Sustainable Computing (3-
Modelling (3-0-0), Social Networks (3-0-0), 

4. Sustainable 0-0), 
Ethics, Policy, Law and regulations in 

Computing  ICT for Development (2-0-
AI(0-0-2), Crowd-sourcing and human 

0) 
computing (3-0-0), Environmental 
Informatics (3-0-0), Computational 
Microeconomics (3-0-0), Project (0-0-6) 

Intelligent 
Communication and 

5. Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 
Networking  
(CS, AIDE, EE) 

VLSI Systems  
6. Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 

(EE, CS) 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering (Direct Entry) 

Table 7. Curriculum of B.Tech. (Computer Science and Engineering) 

Cat Course LTP C N G Cat Course LTP C N G
H C C H C C 

  I Semester   II Semester 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 
Electrical Mechanics 
Engineering 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computer Science 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Bioengineering 

      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 

IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 
Visualization Realization 

NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering Design 0-0-2 2 1 - 
Design I  II  

NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 
Skill I  Skill II  

NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
responsibilities I responsibilities II 

NH Performing Arts I 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
/Sports I  II/Sports II 

Total 12-1- 27 3 17 Total 11-2- 24 3 16 
14 12 

  III Semester   IV Semester 

IS Probability, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science & 1-0-0    1 - 1 
Statistics and Engineering 
Stochastic (Electronic 
Processes materials) 

14 
 



IE MSE -  2X 1- 2 - 2 IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 
(i) Energy materials  0-0 
(ii) Computational  
Material Design 

IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Pattern Recognition 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Systems and Machine 

Learning 

PC Maths for 3-1-0 4   4 PC Software 3-0-2 5   4 
Computing Engineering 

PC Data Structures 3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Human-Machine 0-0-4 4   2 
and Algorithms Interaction 

LS Foundations of 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Design 2-0-2 4   3 
Quantum 
Information 
Processing 
(Program Linked 
Science Elective) 

NE Intro. To Profession 0-0-2 2 1   IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3   3 

Total 17-3- 24 1 21 Total 15-1- 23 - 21 
4 10 

  V Semester   VI Semester 

PC Design and 3-1-0 4   4 PC Cyber Security 3-0-2 5   4 
Analysis of 
Algorithms 

PC Computer 3-0-0 3   3 PC Computer Networks 3-0-3  6   4.5 
Architecture 

PC Operating Systems 3-0-2 5   4 PC Digital Systems Lab 0-0-3 3  1.5 

PC Principles of 3-0-0 3   3 PC CS Core Bouquet -1 3-0-0 3   3 
Programming (Algorithms)/ 2 
Languages (Hardware)  

PC Database Systems 3-0-2 5  4       

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/Open 6-0-0 6   6 
Elective 

NH Professional Ethics 0-1-0   1 - NH Professional Ethics 0-0-2   1 - 
I II 

Total 18-2- 23 1 21 Total 15-1- 23 1 19 
4 8 

  VII Semester   VIII Semester 

15 
 



PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 

PC CS Core Bouquet-1 3-0-0 3   3       
(Algorithms)/2 
(Hardware)  

PE Programme/Open 6-0-0 6 - 6 PE Programme/Open 15-0- 15 - 15 
/ Electives / Electives 0 

OE OE 

IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3             

IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2             
Science 

Total 14-0- 20 - 17 Total 18-0- 18 - 18 
6 0 

Total of Graded Credits - 15
0 

Total of  Non-Graded Credits 9 - 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total 165 

 
  

  

16 
 



13. Curriculum of Double B.Tech.: B.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering and B.Tech. in 
Engineering Science 

Table 8. Programme structure of Double B.Tech. 

Ca Course LTP C N G Ca Course LTP C N GC 
t H C C t H C 

  I Semester   II Semester 

First two semesters same as Table 8a or 8 b 
33 Graded and 6 non graded credits 

  III Semester   IV Semester 

ES Probability, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science & 3 × 3 - 3 
Statistics, and Engineering 1-0-0    
Stochastic Processes 

ES Modern Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 ES Embedded Systems 3-0-2 5 - 4 
and IoT 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Pattern Recognition 3-0-2 5 - 4 
and Machine 
Learning 

ES Data Structures and 3-0-2 5 - 4 ES Design of 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Algorithms Experiments 

IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Control Systems 3-0-2 5 - 4 

NE Intro. To Profession 0-0-2 2 1   IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Total 15-3-4 22 1 19 Total 18-0-6 24 - 21 

  V Semester   VI Semester 

PC Design and 3-1-0 4   4 PC Cyber Security 3-0-2 5   4 
Analysis of 
Algorithms 

PC Principles of 3-0-0 3   3 PC Computer Networks 3-0-3 6   4.5 
Programming 
Languages 

PC Operating Systems 3-0-2 5   4 PC Software 3-0-2 5   4 
Engineering 

PC Database Systems 3-0-2 5   4 PC Human-Machine 0-0-4 4   2 
Interaction 

17 
 



PC Maths for 3-1-0 4   4 PC Digital Design 2-0-2 4  3 
Computing   

      PC CS Core Bouquet - 1 3-0-0 3   3 
(Algorithms)/ 2 
(Hardware) 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3       

N Professional Ethics I 0-1-0   1 - N Professional Ethics II 0-1-0   1 - 
H H 

Total 18-3-4 24 1 22 Total 15-1- 29 1 20.
14 5 

  VII Semester   VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 PE Programme/Enginee 17-0-0 17 - 17 
/ ring Science 

ES Electives 

PC CS Core Bouquet -  3-0-0 3   3 IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 
1 (Algorithms)/ 2 
(Hardware) 

PE Programme/ 12-0-0 12 - 12 PC Digital Systems Lab 0-0-3 3  1.5 
/ Engineering Science 

OE Electives 

PC Computer 3-0-0 3   3       
Architecture 

IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2             
Science 

Total 20-0-6 26 - 23 Total 20-0-0 20 - 21.
5 

Total Graded Credits - 160 

Total of  Non-Graded Credits 9 - 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total 175 

Note: ES are proposed Engineering Science compulsory courses  
  

  

18 
 



 
 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B.Tech. AI & DS Curriculum Structure AY 2020-21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B.Tech. AI&DS Curriculum Structure AY 2020-21 



1. Introduction 
 

This BTech program combines two broad areas, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, while building a 
strong foundation in Computer Science. Artificial Intelligence (AI) aims to create machines to act with higher 
levels of intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. On the other hand, 
Data Science (DS) is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing data pertaining 
to a system or a process. AI and Data Science can feed into each other as evolutionary systems that can 
continuously learn from data and thereby emulate humans better. As the demand for these areas increases, 
there is also an increasing need for building the future workforce for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science. 
IIT Jodhpur will offer this unique program to develop the Artificial Intelligence and Data Science ecosystem in 
the country. The curriculum includes courses in computer science, mathematics, artificial intelligence, 
machine learning, and their applications in various domains. The curriculum also provides opportunities to 
the students to explore specialization areas including visual computing, socio-digital realities, robotics, and 
AIOT. The program also allows the students to venture into Management specialization with AI and 
Technology focus, leading to MBA (BTech + MBA dual degree program), as well as entrepreneurial activities. 
The program also enables the students to build strong industry linkages in terms of practical training program, 
summer internships, and co-supervision on projects. 

 
2. Objectives of the program 

 
1. BTech in AI&DS will offer students with in-depth knowledge of fundamental concepts, as well as 

application- oriented technologies in the broad areas of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science. 
2. A student completing this program will be capable of undertaking careers in industry as well as 

academia. Interested students may also follow entrepreneurial endeavors in AI&DS areas. 
3. He/She will have the option to explore a variety of domains including governance, finance, security, 

transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture/food processing, population studies, legal 
systems, content creation and management systems, weather prediction, economics, predictive 
maintenance, smart manufacturing, education, human and robot interaction/intelligent automation, 
smart city, drug discovery, and aid for differently abled/accessibility technology. 

 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 

 
After completing this program, a student will develop an ability to: 
1. Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AI&DS 

methodologies. 
2. Skill set to clean, process, analyze, manage and handle security and privacy aspects of structured and 

unstructured data. 
3. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining methods for 

generating relevant insight from data. 
4. Design and build real-world AI&DS systems, solving application-specific problems, and to reason about 

them. 
5. Conceive, design and develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine interfaces. 
6. Design, develop, and deploy machine learning based applications using structured and unstructured data 

(e.g., speech, text, images/videos). 
7. Capability to follow a unique interdisciplinary approach for solving problems, using knowledge of 

mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among physics, chemistry, biology, 
engineering sciences, and management. 

8. Understand and assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AI&DS based systems and their 
impact on societal and environmental context. 

9. Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments. 
10. Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories. 
11. Plan and manage technical projects. 

 
4. Learning Outcomes 

 
The student will have an ability to 
1. Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals along with artificial intelligence 

and machine learning knowledge, and an engineering specialization to develop solutions to real-world 
problems. 

2. Apply appropriate theories, design principles, frameworks, and protocols to develop AI & DS based 
system prototypes. 

 1 



3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of modern simulation, and AI & DS programming tools with an 
understanding of the limitations. 

4. Apply to reason informed by the contextual knowledge to assess societal, health, safety, legal and cultural 
issues and the consequent responsibilities relevant to the professional engineering practice. 

5. Function effectively as an individual, and as a member or leader in diverse teams, and in 
multidisciplinary settings. 

6. Communicate effectively on complex engineering activities by comprehending and writing effective 
reports and design documentation, making effective presentations and exchanging clear instructions. 

7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real-world problems. 
8. Recognize the need for, and have the preparation and ability to engage in independent and life-long 

learning in the broadest context of technological change. 
 

5. New skill sets targeted 
 

1. AI&DS algorithms for transforming large data into actionable decision 
2. Building end to end systems for enhancing human capabilities using vision, language, and text processing 
3. Foundations in ML Optimization 
4. Ethical, Safe, and Dependable AI/ML Systems 
5. Familiarity with emerging and futuristic AI&DS techniques 
6. Entrepreneurial capability 
7. Written and oral communication 

 2 



6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
Map topics with courses in the table given below: 

 
Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 
Area Topics Category Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 

(Core/ 
Techniques 
Technology/ 
Systems) 

 Abstract Data Types, Linear Data Structures, Non Core Data Structures and 
AI and ML Linear Data Structures, Stack, Queue, Link List, Heap, Algorithms (PC) 

Sorting, Hashing, Algorithm Analysis, Graph, Tree 
Discrete Structures, Logics, Set, Graph and Trees, Core Maths for Computing (PC) 
Deterministic Finite Automata, Non-deterministic Finite 
Automata, PushDown Automata, Context Free 
Grammar, Turing Machine, Lexical and Syntax 
Analysis, Parsing 

Hardware-Software interaction, Digital circuit design Core Principles of Computer 
and analysis, Computer system design, Instruction set Systems - 1 (PC) 
architecture, Language translation, Semantic analysis 

Network-OS interaction, Process management, Storage Core Principles of Computer 
management, Systems - 2 (PC) 

Complexity Analysis, Divide-and-conquer, Greedy Core Design and Analysis of 
Algorithms, Dynamic Programming, Linear Algorithms (PC) 
Programming, Universal Hashing, Max-flow Min-cut, 
Amortized Analysis, Traveling Salesman Problem, 
Approximation Algorithms 

Bayes Decision Theory, Regression, Bias variance, Core and Pattern Recognition and 
Maximum Likelihood Estimation, Bayesian Parameter Technique Machine Learning (IE) 
Estimation, Decision Tree, Random Forest, Artificial 
Neural Network, Clustering, k-means, SVM, Feature 
Selection, Dimensionality Reduction 
Uninformed Search Strategies, Informed Search Technique Artificial Intelligence (PC) 
Strategies, Local Search Algorithms, Hill Climbing, 
Constraint Satisfaction Problems, Backtracking, 
Adversarial Search, Min-Max algorithms, Propositional 
Logic, Reasoning Patterns, First-order logic, Syntax, 
Semantics, Q-value, Policy, 
Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Optimization, Technique Deep Learning (PC) 
Regularization, Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural 
Network, Recurrent Neural Network, LSTM, Deep 
Generative Models, Generative Adversarial Network 
(GAN), Deep Belief Network, Deep Convolutional 
GAN, Variational Autoencoder, Representation 
Learning, Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer 
Learning, Distributed Representation, Domain 
Adaptation, Neural Language Model, Adversarial 
Learning 
Accuracy-explainabilitytradeoff, Interpretability Technique Dependable AI (PC) 
problem, Predictability, Transparency, Traceability, 
Causality, Reasoning, Attention and Saliency, 
Interpretable AI, Prediction Consistency, Adversarial 
Robustness, Trustworthy AI, Integrity, Reproducibility, 
Accountability, Bias-free AI, Verified AI, Federated 
Learning, Differential Privacy, 

 3 



 Convexity, Linear programming, Duality, Integer Core and Optimization for Machine 
programming, Nonlinear programming, Lagrange Technique Learning (PC) 
multipliers, First and second order conditions, Local 
and global convergence, Gradient descent methods 

Decision-making, Utility Theory, Utility Functions, Core Advanced AI (PE) 
Decision Networks, Sequential Decision Problems, 
Partially Observable MDP, Game Theory, 
Reinforcement Learning, Generalization, Policy Search, 
Hidden Markov Model, Kalman Filter, Knowledge 
Representation, Ontological Engineering, Situation 
Calculus, Semantic Networks, Description Logic, 
Planning graphs, Partial-order Planning, Conditional 
Planning, Continuous Planning, Multi-agent Planning, 
Hierarchical Task Network Planning, Non-deterministic 
Domains 
Kernel Machines, Variants of Support Vector Machines, Core and Advanced Machine 
PAC Theory, Boosting, Graphical Models, Structural Techniques Learning (PE) 
Predictions, Deep Reinforcement Learning, Sparse 
Coding 
Computational complexity of AI models, Prediction Systems and Resource-constrained 
accuracy, Numeric accuracy, Precision, Memory Technique Artificial Intelligence (PE) 
footprints, Edge AI, Memory Optimization of Models, 
Hardware accelerators for Edge AI, Vision Processing 
Unit, Streaming Hybrid Architecture Vector Engine, 
Open Neural Network Exchange 
Search Engine Architecture, Retrieval Models, Technique Information Retrieval (PE) 
Performance Evaluation, Text Categorization, Text 
Clustering, Web Information Retrieval, Structured 
Document Retrieval 
Graph algorithms, Directed and Undirected graph, Core Graph Theoretic 
Planner graph, Graph coloring, Hamiltonion and Algorithms (PE) 
Eulorian graph, Bipartite graphs, Trees. 
Streaming Algorithms, Stream mining using Clustering, Core and Stream Analytics (PE) 
Massive Data Clustering, Data Stream Classification, Technique 
Distributed Mining of Streaming Data, Change 
Diagnosis, Forecasting on Stream, Dimensionality 
Reduction for Streaming data. 

HCI and User experience, Prototyping techniques and Technique Human-Machine 
Social evaluation, Interface design and interaction, Speculative and Systems Interaction (PC) 
Sensing design, Value sensitive design 

Visual World, Geometry, Lights and Optics, Tracking, Technique Introduction to AR and 
Motion, Depth, devices and tools VR (PE) 

Graphs, Network Models, Network Data Generation, Technique Social Networks (PE) 
Structural Properties, Link Prediction, Community 
Detection, Information Cascade, Small World 
Phenomenon, Homophily, Structural Balance, 
Components, NetworkX, Gephi, Network Evolution, 
Multi-layer network 

Data and Representing data, Data science ecosystem, data Techniques Data Engineering (PC) 
Distributed sources, data storage, data model, Structured data, and Systems 
Sciences unstructured data, semi-structured data, Accessing 

data, SQL, NoSQL databases, parallel data reads/writes 
for high throughput, distributed database, Analysing 
data, distributed data processing 
Data Visualization, Data representation, feature Techniques Data Visualization (PC) 
representations, encoded representations, Spatial data and Systems 
representation, Time-series data representations, 

 4 



 visualization of multivariate data, geometry,   
Information illustration, Maps and Graphics, Advanced 
Visualization, Interactive graphics, infographics, 
visualization of high dimensional data 
Multivariate analysis, Sampling theory, Matrix Techniques Maths for Big Data (PC) 
decomposition, Algorithms for big matrices, Data and Systems 
intensive processing 

Decision Computational Neuroscience Models: Descriptive,  Computational 
Sciences Mechanistic and Interpretive models, Synapse, Neural Neuroscience (PE) 
and encoding, Neural decoding, Neuron models, Spikes, 
Cognition Modeling connections between neurons, Synaptic 

plasticity and learning, Unsupervised and supervised 
learning from the perspective of neurons 
Biological signals, Biomedical imaging modalities,  Bio-imaging (PE) 
Sectioning, Multimodal images, Reconstruction, Image 
segmentation, Object delineation, Classification, Image 
registration, Deep Learning for Bio-imaging, Tracking, 
Interactive image analysis 

Application Image digitization, Pixel relationships and distances, Technique Digital Image Processing 
s Camera model and stereo imaging, Image transforms, (PE) 

Image Enhancement: Spatial and Frequency domain, 
Image Restoration, Image segmentation, Color image 
processing, image morphology, Image compression and 
coding, Image features 
Spoken language technology, dialog and conversational Techniques Speech Understanding 
systems, automatic speech recognition, speech (PE) 
synthesis, affect detection, dialogue management. 
Image formation and transformations, Camera Techniques Computer Vision (PE) 
calibration, Image restoration, Spatial and Wavelet- 
based processing, Epipolar Geometry, SfM, Optical 
flow, Key-point detection, Feature description and 
matching, Deep learning for vision, Applications 
Geometric primitives, clipping, viewing, rendering, Technique Computer Graphics (PE) 
animation, Shading, Coloring, OpenGL 

Word representation, NLP tasks, Seq2Seq model, Applications Natural Language 
Question Answering, Sentiment Analysis, Dialogue Understanding (PE) 
system, Machine Translation, natural language 
generation, Interpretability, Knowledge Graphs 
Biometric system design, Genesis of biometrics, System Applications Advanced Biometrics (PE) 
architecture, Performance evaluation, Biometric 
modalities, Biometric security, Biometric devices, 
Biomedical applications 
Multi-dimensional signals, systems, transforms and Applications Video Processing (PE) 
sampling; Camera models; Motion and shape 
estimation; Video segmentation and tracking; Video 
filtering, compression and restoring; Ego-centric, 360- 
degree and Streaming video 

 5 



7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 

Table 2. ProposedCourse Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes 
S.N. Course Type Course Category Regular B.Tech. Double B.Tech. 

Credit Total Credit Total 
1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 

Science (IS) 16 16 
Humanities (IH) 12 9 

2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 0 
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 51 71 47+3 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 17 21-3 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 
5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 22 22 

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8,11 8 
Total Graded 150  160 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 
Engineering (NE) 3 3 
Design/Practical Experience (ND) 6 6 

Total Graded + Non-Graded 165  175 

 6 



8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 

Table 4. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up 6000 Level) 
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits 

Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours (TC=TH/3) 
(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1 
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for projects refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 

 7 



9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 

Table 5. Programme Compulsory Courses 
Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 

1 Data Structure and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 
2 Maths for Computing 3-1-0 4 4 
3 Principles of Computer Systems - 1 (Compilers and 2-0-2 4 3 

CA) 
4 Data Engineering 3-0-3 6 4.5 
5 Human-Machine Interaction 0-0-4 4 2 
6 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3-1-0 4 4 
7 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 3 
8 Optimization for ML 3-0-3 6 4.5 
9 Principles of Computer Systems - 2 3-0-2 4 4 
10 Data Visualization 3-0-3 6 4.5 
11 Deep Learning 3-0-3 6 4.5 
12 Dependable AI 3-0-0 3 3 
13 DSAI Core Elective 1 (DS + X) 3-0-0 3 3 
14 DSAI Core Elective 2 (AI + X) 3-0-0 3 3 
15 Maths for Big Data* 2-1-0 3 3 

Total 51 
*For Core ES + AI&DS program, under DS+X for regular program, Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulations in AI 
(0- 0-2) is a core course under Professional Ethics - II (Sem VI). 

 8 



10. Area-wise Programme Elective Courses 
 

Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses 
S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P Credit 

1  Advanced Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 
2  Advanced Machine Learning 3-0-0 3 
3  Resource Constrained Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 
4 AI and ML Scalable Machine Learning 3-0-0 3 
5 Computational Learning Theory 3-0-0 3 
6 Information Retrieval 3-0-0 3 
7 Graph Theoretic Algorithms 3-0-0 3 
8 Stream Analytics 3-0-0 3 
9  Introduction to Robotics 3-0-0 3 
10 Robotics and Planning and Decision Making of Robots 3-0-0 3 
11 Automation Multi-Agent Systems 3-0-0 3 
12 Autonomous Systems 3-0-0 3 
13  Multimodal Interfaces 0-0-2 2 
14  Introduction to Haptics 3-0-0 3 
15 Socio-Digital Reality Introduction to AR and VR 3-0-0 3 
16 Advanced Human-Machine Interaction 3-0-0 3 
17 Social Networks 3-0-0 3 
18  Computational Neuroscience 3-0-0 3 
19 Science of Intelligence Connectomics 3-0-0 3 
20 Bioimaging 3-0-0 3 
21  Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3 
22  Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 
23  Natural Language Understanding 3-0-0 3 
24  Speech Understanding 3-0-0 3 
25 Applications Computational Linguistics 3-0-0 3 
26 Advanced Biometrics 3-0-0 3 
27 Computer Graphics 3-0-0 3 
28 Video Processing 3-0-0 3 
29 Animation 3-0-0 3 
30 GPU Programming 3-0-0 3 
31  Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems 3-0-0 3 
32 Cyber Physical Systems, Embedded Systems Design 3-0-0 3 
33 Sensors and Internet of Security in CPS 3-0-0 3 
34 Things Edge and Fog Computing 3-0-0 3 
35 Real Time Systems 3-0-0 3 
36  Introduction to Space Science 3-0-0 3 
37  Reliability Engineering and Life Testing 3-0-0 3 
38 Data and Discovery Introduction to Game Theory 3-0-0 3 
39 Science Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos 3-0-0 3 
40 Differential Geometry 3-0-0 3 
41 Introduction to Financial Engineering 3-0-0 3 
42 Computational Chemistry 3-0-0 3 
43  Special Topics in ML 3-0-0 3 
44 Special Topics Special Topics: Advancements in Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 
45 Special Topics in Data Science 3-0-0 3 

 9 



11. Specialization to be offered by the department 

Table 7a. Specialization and courses 
S. Name of Specialization Core (8 Specialization Elective (12 Credits) 

No. Specialization credits) 
   Digital Image Processing, Video Processing and 
   Analysis, Advanced Machine Learning, 
   Introduction to AR and VR, Scalable Machine 

Learning, Computational Photography, 
 Visual Computing (CS, Computer Graphics (3-0-0), 

1. AI&DS, EE) Computer Vision (3-0-0), Computational Imaging, Principles of Biological 
Visual Computing Lab (0-0- Vision, Bioimaging, Medical Image Analysis, 
4) Visual Perception, Advancements in Computer 

Vision, Animation, Real-time Vision 
Architecture, Image Synthesis, 3D Shape 
Analysis, Image and Video Forensics, Selected 
Topics in Computer Vision, Project (0-0-12) 

  Social Network (3-0-0), Introduction to Haptics, Design Process, Speech 
2. Socio-Digital Reality Introduction to AR and VR Understanding, Computer Graphics, HCI, NLU, 

(CS, AI&DS, EE) (3-0-0), Multimodal Computer Vision, Visual Perception, Image and 
interface Lab (0-0-4) Video Forensics, Project (0-0-12) 

 Intelligent   
3. Communications and Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 

Networking 

4. Robotics Jointly with RM-IDRP Jointly with RM-IDRP 

5. AIOT Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 

   Algorithm for big data, computer vision, 
   machine learning with big data, edge and fog 
 AI  computing, NLP, GPU Programming, Data 

6. (for non-AI, non-CS AI (3-0-0), Deep Learning Visualization, Introduction to AR and VR, 
Students) (3-0-0), AI Lab (0-0-4) Dependable AI, Resource constrained AI, Social 

Network Analysis, Optimization, Computer 
Graphics, Advanced AI, Advanced ML, Project 
(0-0-12) 

*Science of Intelligence, Smart Healthcare, and Language Technologies Specializations will be added in 
the future 

 
Table 7b. AI+X courses. 

S. No. Course Status 
1. AI + Industry 4.0 Jointly with ME 

2 Autonomous Systems IDRP 
3. AI + Transportation CSE 

 
Table 7c. DS+X (Applied Statistics) courses. 

S. No. Course Status 
1. Maths for Big Data CS+Math course 
2. Statistical Inference and Simulation Techniques Maths course 
3. Introduction to Financial Engineering Maths course 
4. Time Series Analysis Math course 

 10 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. AI&DS (Regular) 
 

Table 8b. Curriculum of B.Tech. in AI&DS 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 

 I Semester  II Semester 
IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 

Electrical Mechanics 
Engineering 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computer 
Science 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Bioengineering 

      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 
      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

IS Mathematics I 3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Design I Design II 
NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Skill I Skill II 
NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 

and and 
responsibilities I responsibilities II 

NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
I/ Sports I II/ Sports II 

Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 Total 11-2-12 25 3 16 
 III Semester  IV Semester 

LS PSSP 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science 1 × 1 - 1 
IE i- Energy materials 2X 1-0-0 2 - 2 & Engineering 1-0-0 
ii- Computational (Electronic 
Materials Design materials) 

PC Data Structures 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 
and Algorithms Recognition and 

Machine Learning 
PC Maths for 3-1-0 4 0 4 IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 

Computing 
IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC HMI PCS-1 PCS-2 0-0-4 4 - 2 

Systems 2-0-2 2 - 3 
LS Quantum Info 3-0-0 3 - 3 3-0-2 4 - 4 

Processing 
NE Intro. To 0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Profession 
Total 17-3-4 24 1 21 Total 15-1-10 24 - 21 

 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC DA of 3-1-0 4  4 PC Data 3-0-3 6  4.5 

Algorithms   -  Visualization   -  
Artificial 3-0-0 3 - 3 Deep Learning 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 
Intelligence 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Optimization in    Dependable AI 3-0-0 3 3 
ML  
Data Engineering   

3-0-3 6 4.5 

 11 



IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/ 6-0-0 6  6 
Open Elective 

NH Professional 0-1-0  1 - NH Ethics, Policy, 0-0-2  1 - 
Ethics I Law and 

Regulations in AI 
Total 15-2-6 22 1 19 Total 18-0-4 24 1 21 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 

PCPE AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE/ Programme/ 15-0-0 15 - 15 
/ Programme/ 6-0-0 6 6 OE Open Electives 

OE Open Electives 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       

IS Environmental Sci 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Total 14-0-6 21 - 17 Total 18-0-0 18 - 18 
Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit 9 150 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 
Grand Total 165 

 12 



13. Curriculum of Double B.Tech. : B.Tech. AI&DS Engineering and Engineering Science 
 

Table 9. Programme structure of Double B.Tech. 
Cat Course LTP CH N GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 

C 
 I Semester  II Semester 
First two semesters same as Table 8a or 8 b 33 Graded and 6 non graded credits 
 III Semester  IV Semester 

ES Probability, Statistics, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials 3 × 3 - 3 
Stochastic Processes Science & 1-0-0 

Engineering 
ES Modern Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 ES Embedded 3-0-2 5 - 4 

Systems and 
IoT 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Recognition 
and Machine 
Learning 

ES Data Structures and 3-0-2 5 - 4 ES Design of 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Algorithms Experiments 

IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Modelling and 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Simulation 

NE Intro. To Profession 0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Total 15-3-4 22 1 19 Total 18-0-6 24 - 21 

 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC Maths for Comp. 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC PCS-1 2-0-2 2   3 

 DA of Algorithm 3-1-0 4 - 4  PCS-2 3-0-2 4 6 - 4 
 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 - 3  Data Engg 3-0-3 6  - 4.5 
 Optimization in ML   -   Data 3-0-3   - 4.5 
 HMI 3-0-3 6  4.5  Visualization  6    
       Deep Learning 3-0-3    4.5 
  0-0-4 4  2  AI+X / DS+ X  3    
       Dependable AI 3-0-0 3   3 
        3-0-0    3 

PE Programme/ 3-0-0 3  3       
Engineering Science 
Elective/ Multimodal 
Bouquet (3) 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3       
NH Professional Ethics I 0-1-0  1 - NH Ethics, 0-0-2  1 - 

 Policy
, Law 
 and 
Regulations
 i
n 
AI 

Total 18-3-7 27 1 23.5 Total 20-0-15 30 1 26.5 
 VII Semester  VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 PE/ Programme/ 14-0-0 14 - 14 
ES Engineering 

 13 



       Science     
Electives 

PC AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3  3 IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Maths for Big Data 2-1-0 3 - 3 

- 
PE/ Programme/ 9-0-0 9 - 9       
OE Engineering Science 

Electives/ 
Multimodal Bouquet 
(3) 

IS Environmental Science 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Total 16-1-6 25 - 20 Total 17-0-0 17 - 17 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit 9 160 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total 175 

Note: ES are proposed Engineering Science compulsory courses 
 
 

 

 14





Mathematics, being the basis of many disciplines, is a subject that evolves with time and creates new theories to solve real-world challenging problems. Our department has been taking a leading role in developing new methods to model such situations that can be used in diverse areas of computer science, engineering, and basic sciences. The department has faculty with research interests in the areas of Algebra, Mathematical Physics, Scientific Computation, Numerical Analysis, Partial Differential Equations, Topological Dynamics, Low Dimensional Chaos, Dynamical Systems, Renormalization in Low-dimensional dynamics, Wavelet Analysis, Fractional Transform Theory, Image Processing, Financial Risk Analysis, Categorical Data Analysis, Reliability Theory, Applied Probability.We are excited to offer high-quality programs at postgraduate level for students who wish to apply math to science or engineering such as a two-year M.Sc. program in Mathematics, a four-year M.Sc-M.Tech program in Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences, a two year M.Tech program in Data and Computational Sciences. We also offer an M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree program in Data and Computational Sciences and a Ph.D. Program with specialization in different areas of Mathematics to those who wish to earn a deeper understanding of pure and applied Mathematics. The Department of Mathematics is dedicated to advancing the fields of pure mathematics, applied mathematics and statistics. Our vision is to emphasize both the fundamental principles of core mathematics and the foundational concepts essential for analyzing key principles applied in cutting-edge technologies. Since its establishment, the department has been actively engaged in research across various critical areas of mathematics and computing.The department also aimed to explore modern aspects of mathematics coupled with computational capabilities to develop a workforce specialized in mathematical aspects of key technologies. With this inclination, the department initiated academic programs to address the mathematical needs of both industry and academia. Currently, we offer various programmes, namely, a two-year M.Sc. program in Mathematics, a four-year M.Sc-M.Tech program in Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences, a two year M.Tech program in Data and Computational Sciences.... Computer Science and Engineering, today, plays a major role in transforming every aspect of human life - in addressing social challenges and catalyzing the ongoing wave of the industrial revolution. The department is driven by its commitment to excel in next generation technology development and research. Our mission is to strengthen industry-academia collaborations and prepare our students to contribute to multi-disciplinary projects and R&D for solving problems of national interest.To be among the top 10 departments in terms of research contributions, practical impact, and applications of Computer Science and Engineering in the country in the next 3 years, and internationally well known in some focused areas in the next 5 years. Some of our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of ìcomputing for allî across disciplines at the institute.Our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of ìcomputing for allî across disciplines at the institute.(M1) Achieving excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subjects for innovative discoveries.(M2) Develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating within the institute, as well by means of international, national and regional institutes. The collaborations may be fostered by research visits, collaborative projects, joint thesis, internship guidance, research mentoring etc.(M3) Develop and support the notion of ìcomputing for allî across disciplines at the institute.(M4) Embracing shared dialogue across disciplines and encouraging experiential learning to redefine the contours of traditional Computer Science teaching and learning. Be one of the leading departments in the country for hybrid CSE education.(M5) Define and solve real-world problems in collaboration with industry, and develop industry- connect by means of research grants/ consultancies, and collaborative projects. Develop Start-up ecosystem in emerging areas of computing in collaboration with other departments at IIT Jodhpur.(M6) Dissemination of knowledge without physical boundaries, i.e. classroom, online and other modes of teaching, to create a workforce which is ready to ethically solve technological challenges of the next generation.(M7) Provide thought leadership in public policy and ethics of emerging computing technologies towards building an equitable and ethical society. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur, established in 2009 offers a B.Tech. program in Bioengineering, an M.Tech. and M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree programs in Bioscience & Bioengineering. Our programs are uniquely designed to inspire innovations in biotechnology, engineering, and medicine from an understanding of† biological systems.† This capacity building is assuming importance in the present times for providing solutions to societal problems in trans-disciplinary frameworks. A major focus is on neurosciences and neurodegenerative disorders, mechanistic biology, environmental and medical microbiology, computational biology, precision health, and bioprospecting for novel molecules and bio-actives from natural resources of the Thar ecoregion. We also offer a competitive Ph.D. program to inculcate scientific temper, independent thinking, and skillsets for scientific entrepreneurship. We encourage and provide avenues for the participation of bioengineering graduates with diverse engineering disciplines to develop technologies for: Bioscience and Bioengineering are pivotal to India's growth. driving innovation and advancing technology in healthcare. Agriculture and environmental sustainability. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur plays a key role in implementing diverse advanced biological research areas within these fields. with a strong focus on fostering research and development (R&D) and entrepreneurship.
By offering a multidisciplinary platform that integrates cutting-edge research in drug discovery, genomics, and affordable and integrative precision healthcare solutions. Big Data Biology and bioinformatics. In addition. The department actively promotes entrepreneurship by providing incubation support, facilitating industry collaborations, and encouraging the growth of startup ventures in biosciences.With access to advanced research facilities and guidance from expert faculty members, students can transform their ideas into practical, marketable solutions, benefiting industries such as healthcare, agriculture, and biomanufacturing.BSBE Department, IIT Jodhpur, emphasizes interdisciplinary research in the near future, which may also align with national initiatives like the BioE3 policy to promote R&D, commercialization, and the establishment of bioeconomy hubs. The curriculum is thoughtfully designed to meet the diverse aspirations of students entering the fields of biosciences and bioengineering. This approach not only strengthens the academic peers ecosystem but also creates employment opportunities andenhancessocietalwell-being. The rapidly urbanizing society and increasing quality of life demand reliable and intelligent infrastructure systems which are capable of catering to the societal needs at different scales ñ from an individual to the community level.†Consequently, the civil and infrastructure industry has undergone profound changes and is constantly evolving. However, the new-age designs and innovations in the civil and infrastructure industry can only be driven by a group of engineering graduates having multidisciplinary training and a sound understanding of emerging technologies. The Department of Civil†and Infrastructure Engineering, IIT Jodhpur† esatablished in January 2020. We started academics programs in the academic year 2020-2021. The department offers unique programs that incorporate and integrate the elements of conventional civil engineering with advanced transformative technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), cyber-physical-systems (CPS), digital twins (DT), and automated management and information systems. Additionally, a major thrust is also planned on the design, implementation, and maintenance of large-scale integrated infrastructure systems across different domains. The Department strives to be an internationally renowned centre of excellence in education, research, and innovation with a major focus on sustainability and digitalization of infrastructure
The Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur focuses on emerging areas such as smart grids, power electronics, renewable energy integration, embedded systems, signal processing, and advanced communication technologies. The department envisions becoming a nationally recognized center for research in sustainable energy systems and intelligent electronic design. Faculty members are actively working on next-generation semiconductor devices, wireless communication protocols, Internet of Things architectures, and energy-efficient control systems. The Ph.D. program in Electrical Engineering encourages scholars to pursue interdisciplinary research spanning artificial intelligence in power systems, real-time control of cyber-physical systems, and robust signal analytics for biomedical and industrial applications. Doctoral candidates are supported through research assistantships, laboratory infrastructure, and collaborations with leading research institutions and industries. Future goals include establishing dedicated research centers in electric mobility, 6G communication technologies, and resilient power infrastructure for smart cities.
The Department of Mechanical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is committed to advancing research in advanced manufacturing, thermal sciences, robotics, computational mechanics, and sustainable design. The department seeks to integrate simulation-driven design with experimental validation to address complex engineering challenges. Research initiatives focus on additive manufacturing, clean combustion technologies, fluid-structure interaction, and intelligent robotic systems for industrial automation. The Ph.D. program emphasizes originality, methodological rigor, and technological innovation, enabling scholars to contribute to high-impact journals and patents. Long-term objectives include developing autonomous manufacturing ecosystems and strengthening research in green hydrogen technologies, advanced materials processing, and energy-efficient mechanical systems.
The Department of Physics at IIT Jodhpur is dedicated to exploring fundamental and applied research in condensed matter physics, quantum information science, photonics, astrophysics, and high-energy physics. Faculty members are engaged in both theoretical investigations and experimental studies using advanced characterization tools. The department aims to build expertise in quantum technologies, nanophotonics, and computational physics. The doctoral program provides opportunities for in-depth research in emerging areas such as quantum materials, nonlinear optics, and complex systems modeling. Future research directions include establishing interdisciplinary laboratories for quantum computation and collaborating with national facilities for large-scale experimental projects.
The Department of Chemistry at IIT Jodhpur promotes research in synthetic chemistry, catalysis, materials chemistry, environmental chemistry, and chemical biology. The department encourages innovation in sustainable chemical processes and green technologies. Ongoing research explores nanomaterials for energy storage, advanced catalysts for environmental remediation, and molecular design for pharmaceutical applications. The Ph.D. program fosters independent research capabilities and interdisciplinary collaboration with biosciences and materials engineering. Strategic plans include expanding research in electrochemical energy systems, biomolecular engineering, and sustainable chemical manufacturing processes.
The School of Management and Entrepreneurship at IIT Jodhpur integrates technology with management science to address contemporary industrial and societal challenges. Research areas include innovation management, technology strategy, digital transformation, financial analytics, and sustainable business ecosystems. The school aims to nurture entrepreneurial leadership through evidence-based research and industry collaboration. Doctoral research focuses on data-driven decision-making, organizational analytics, and policy-oriented technology management. The future vision includes strengthening incubation networks, promoting startup ecosystems, and conducting impactful research in technology governance and innovation economics.
The Department of Humanities and Social Sciences at IIT Jodhpur contributes to interdisciplinary education through research in economics, psychology, linguistics, philosophy, and public policy. The department emphasizes the ethical, social, and behavioral dimensions of technological development. Research initiatives address behavioral economics, cognitive science, science communication, and technology policy frameworks. The Ph.D. program supports rigorous inquiry into socio-technical systems and sustainable development models. The department aspires to become a center of excellence in technology-society studies, fostering dialogue between engineering innovation and human values.
The Artificial Intelligence and Data Science initiatives at IIT Jodhpur aim to consolidate research across departments into a unified framework for intelligent systems development. Focus areas include deep learning, trustworthy AI, reinforcement learning, explainable models, and large-scale data engineering. Interdisciplinary doctoral research explores applications in healthcare analytics, smart infrastructure, climate modeling, and financial technologies. The institute envisions building advanced computing infrastructure to support large-scale AI experimentation and collaborative research with national and international partners.
IIT Jodhpur continues to strengthen its doctoral ecosystem by encouraging collaborative supervision, international research exposure, and industry-supported projects. The institute is committed to expanding its global research footprint through strategic partnerships, innovation-driven initiatives, and translational research programs. With a strong emphasis on sustainability, digital transformation, and societal impact, IIT Jodhpur aspires to emerge as a globally competitive institution contributing meaningfully to scientific advancement and technological leadership.
The Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is focused on advancing research in advanced alloys, functional materials, nanostructured systems, and sustainable materials processing. Faculty members investigate structureñproperty relationships to design materials for aerospace, energy storage, biomedical implants, and electronic applications. Experimental facilities support microstructural characterization, mechanical testing, corrosion analysis, and computational materials modeling. The Ph.D. program emphasizes interdisciplinary research integrating materials informatics, additive manufacturing of metals, and next-generation lightweight composites. The department aims to establish a center for advanced materials innovation that supports strategic sectors and promotes industry-linked translational research.
The Department of Chemical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur promotes research in process systems engineering, reaction engineering, transport phenomena, and sustainable chemical technologies. Investigations include carbon capture systems, green hydrogen production, membrane separations, and advanced reactor design. Faculty members integrate data-driven modeling with experimental validation to optimize industrial processes. The doctoral program encourages exploration of energy-efficient process intensification, computational fluid dynamics for multiphase systems, and circular economy approaches in chemical industries. Future plans involve creating pilot-scale research facilities for sustainable fuels and biochemical processing.
The Department of Earth Sciences at IIT Jodhpur conducts research in geophysics, climate science, hydrogeology, and environmental geoscience. Studies focus on groundwater sustainability, seismic hazard assessment, desertification processes, and climate variability in arid regions. Advanced computational modeling and field-based data collection form the backbone of research methodology. The Ph.D. program trains scholars to address pressing environmental challenges using geospatial analytics and predictive modeling techniques. Long-term objectives include establishing collaborative research programs on climate resilience and sustainable resource management in semi-arid ecosystems.
The Centre for Emerging Technologies at IIT Jodhpur brings together multidisciplinary expertise to address frontier areas such as quantum computing, advanced sensors, cyber-physical systems, and intelligent automation. Research initiatives emphasize prototype development, system integration, and real-world deployment of innovative technologies. Doctoral researchers work on scalable architectures, secure embedded platforms, and adaptive control frameworks. The centre envisions fostering global collaborations and contributing to national missions in advanced manufacturing and digital infrastructure.
The Department of Design at IIT Jodhpur integrates engineering principles with creativity, human-centered design, and product innovation. Research themes include user experience design, assistive technologies, sustainable product development, and interactive systems. Faculty members encourage design thinking methodologies combined with data analytics and prototyping tools. The Ph.D. program supports research in design cognition, digital fabrication, and socio-technical product ecosystems. The department aims to contribute to innovation-led entrepreneurship and socially responsible design solutions.
The Centre for Digital Humanities at IIT Jodhpur explores the intersection of computation and cultural studies. Research areas include computational linguistics, digital archiving, text analytics, and technology-enabled heritage preservation. Doctoral scholars investigate language technologies for low-resource languages, data visualization for social sciences, and digital storytelling platforms. The centre aspires to strengthen interdisciplinary collaboration between engineering and humanities to create inclusive digital knowledge systems.
The interdisciplinary research initiatives at IIT Jodhpur increasingly focus on sustainability, resilience, and technological equity. Collaborative projects address smart agriculture systems, affordable healthcare technologies, and climate-responsive urban planning. Doctoral scholars are encouraged to engage in problem-driven research that combines theoretical innovation with measurable societal impact. The institute continues to expand research funding, international exchange programs, and industry partnerships to foster a globally competitive academic ecosystem.
IIT Jodhpur envisions strengthening its doctoral programs through structured coursework, research ethics training, and advanced methodological workshops. Scholars are supported in publishing high-quality journal articles, filing patents, and participating in international conferences. The institute promotes collaborative thesis supervision across departments to encourage interdisciplinary discovery. With a commitment to excellence in research, innovation, and societal transformation, IIT Jodhpur aims to contribute significantly to emerging scientific frontiers and national development priorities.




I am a faculty in Engineering at IIT, Jodhpur (Indian Institute of Technology). I did a stint from March 2012-March 2014 as Assistant Professor at Center of Excellence in Energy, IITJ. I headed the focus group of Mechanical Engineering in 2014-15 to perform transition from COE Energy to Department of Mechanical Engineering. From 2015 to March 2019 as an Assistant Professor (7 years in total) in Mechanical Engineering. From March 2019 to June 2023 (4.2 years), Anand was an Associate Professor at the department and headed the Center for Emerging Technologies for Sustainable Development (CETSD) till August 31, 2023. I am also affiliated to the Space Science and Technology Program at IITJ since 2019.

Presently, I am a Professor in Mechanical Engineering.†

My teams work did focus in areas of† water-energy nexus, water filtration, wetland hydrodynamics, rural technologies, engineering education, micro-turbo designs, irrigation and horticulture, materials and probabilistic modeling in engineering design.

I was a Post Doctoral Associate at Rohsenow Kendall Heat Transfer Laboratory , in Mechanical Engineering Department at MIT, Cambridge, MA. My Advisor was Prof. John Lienhard V. I worked in the area of water-energy nexus and contributed mainly to energy for water and economics of water use.††

Enjoy and Read: Cost of Water

Curious Read: Energy for Water

Before I had another Post Doctoral Fellowship from Food, Agricultural and Biological Engineering (FABE) Department at The Ohio State University at Columbus, OH. I was involved in research on agricultural constructed wetland systems and also in physics of clay ceramics. My advisors were Prof. Larry C Brown and Prof. Alfred B. O. Soboyejo.†

I received the PhD (Engineering) under the guidance of Prof Alfred Soboyejo and Prof. Larry C Brown from Food, Agricultural and Biological Engineering Department and† I conducted some of my experiments at The Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials (PRISM) at Princeton University. This also helped me to work under Prof Winston Soboyejo.

†Previously I received the M.S. in Engineering Science and Mechanics under the guidance of Prof. Muhammad Ali R Sharif from the Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics Department at University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa. I was also co-advised by Prof. Richard C Bradt, Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, University of Alabama. Here I worked on numerical modeling of molten steel flows in an industrial tundish. Prior to this I have experience as a design engineer for irrigation projects with CIMMYT (a part of the CGIAR) India. Here I had the honor to work under Dr Raj Kishan Gupta.† Prior to that, I was at IIT Delhi and part of UN FAO projects in the mentorship of Prof P M V Subbarao.


†My Bachelors in Mechanical Engineering is from Madurai Kamaraj University in 2001. I am an alumnus of the Kerala School at Vikas Puri in New Delhi run under the aegis of Kerala Education Society and Government of Delhi.†
B. Ravindra joined IIT Jodhpur in 2010. He obtained his BTech from NIT Warangal in 1987 and M.Tech from IIT Kanpur in 1989 both in the area of Mechanical engineering. He obtained his PhD in 1994 from IIT Kanpur in the area of Nonlinear Vibrations. His main areas of research are Nonlinear Vibrations, Mechatronics, Vehicle dynamics and Renewable energy. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, he did his postdoctoral work in HongKong in the year 1995-1996. Subsequently he spent two years as an Alexander von Humboldt fellow at Technical university of Darmstadt, Germany. During 1998-2000 he worked in gas turbine industry with Alstom power. He worked on shape memory alloy actuators for automotive applications at the General Motors R&D center in Bangalore. At the IIT Jodhpur, he was involved in establishing a rooftop solr PV plant and Mechanical engineering laboratories. He was also a member of Building works committee and was actively involved in the campus construction and sustainable buildings research. He conducted a GIAN program on Vehicle dynamics. He is also involved in "Bridging the Innovation gap in schools" project to promote establishment of tinkering labs in rural schools. Dr. Rahul Chhibber is a Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur, where he has been a faculty member since 2012. He earned his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from IIT Roorkee in 2008.

His research interests encompass welding and joining, manufacturing and materials processing, and the mechanical behavior of materials. He has contributed significantly to the development of welding consumables for shielded metal arc and submerged arc welding processes. His work also includes the fabrication and structural integrity assessment of dissimilar material joints.

Dr. Chhibber has been involved in hygrothermal investigations on fiber-reinforced polymer nanocomposites. He has published over 90 research articles and has an h-index of 27. His work is widely cited, with over 2,400 citations.

His student recently received the C.V. Raman Gold Medal for the best thesis in 2024. He was also awarded the W.H. Hobart Memorial Award from the American Welding Society in 2024.

His research group has been recognized for excellence in presentations and research experimentation, including awards at international conferences and access to research facilities in Switzerland.
Dr. Prodyut Ranjan Chakraborty is a Professor in the Mechanical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur. He received his Bachelor degree of Mechanical Engineering from the North Bengal University in 2000, and his M.Sc Engineering in 2004, and PhD in 2011 both from the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore. Prior to his joining at IIT Jodhpur, he served two years at the Department of Material Physics in Space in German Aerospace Center (DLR) Cologne as a postdoctoral research fellow. He also worked as a Research Analyst at the Applied CFD Lab, G.E. Global Research Center Bangalore during the years 2004 and 2005. His primary area of research is numerical modeling of alloy solidification, latent heat based energy storage systems for high temperature applications, Thermal management and thermal comfort, and sorption coolingDr. Chandan Pandey completed his M.Tech. in Mechanical and Industrial Engineering from the IIT Roorkee Roorkee in 2012. He began his academic career as a faculty member at HCST, Farah, Mathura, where he served for approximately one year. He has completed Ph.D. in the area of welding from IIT Roorkee in 2018. Following his Ph.D., Dr. Pandey joined SRM University as a faculty member in July 2018. Shortly thereafter, he joined to the IIT Jodhpur in April 2018, where he currently holds the position of Associate Professor. During his academic tenure, Dr. Pandey contributed to research activities at IIT Jodhpur, broadening his expertise in welding, weld testing, materials characterization, and residual stress analysis. Over the past six years, Dr. Pandey has successfully supervised 06 PhDs and over 12 M.Tech. theses. His contributions to the field have been recognized through several prestigious honors, including the INAE Young Associateship (2024) and the Institution of Engineers (India) Young Engineers Award (2023ñ24). Mayank Vatsa is a Professor at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur, a Fellow of IEEE and IAPR, and a member of the National Academy of AI (USA). His research focuses on Artificial Intelligence, with an emphasis on Generative AI, Responsible AI, computer vision, and biometrics. He is a recipient of India's prestigious Swarnajayanti Fellowship and the IEEE Meritorious Service Award (2023). He serves as Co-Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE Transactions on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science, a journal he led the efforts to establish during his tenure as Vice President of the IEEE Biometrics Council. He has also held senior roles at premier conferences like AAAI, CVPR, ICCV, IJCB, and FG. Dr. Vatsa has contributed in several of India's key technology initiatives, contributing to UIDAI (Aadhaar) standards, DigiYatra, the NITI Aayog 'Responsible AI for All' policy, national biometric standards, and the formation of the Technology Innovation Hub at IIT Jodhpur. D?r. Singh is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. She earned her Ph.D. in Computer Science from West Virginia University, USA. She is a globally recognized leader in artificial intelligence and machine learning, with a focus on pattern recognition, biometrics, medical image analysis, and Responsible AI. Her contributions to the field have been recognized with the highest distinctions, including being named a Fellow of the IEEE, IAPR, and Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE). She is also an ACM Distinguished Member and a member of the National Academy of AI (USA). A prolific researcher, Prof. Singh has authored over 400 publications in top-tier venues, which have garnered more than 16,200 citations (h index: 71). Her research program has attracted external grants exceeding Rs. 56 crores. She holds editorial leadership roles, serving as the Founding Co-Editor-in-Chief of ACM AI Letters and the Associate Editor-in-Chief of the prestigious Pattern Recognition Journal. Prof. Singh's work has demonstrated profound real-world impact. Her face recognition technology was instrumental in the challenging task of identifying victims of the Balasore train accident, while her deepfake detection systems were deployed to ?p?revent the? spread of misinformation ?i?n India's 2024 general elections. Her contributions have been honored with numerous awards, including the Nasscom AI Gamechangers Award and the Facebook Award for Ethics in AI. She has supervised 14 Ph.D. students to graduation (14 ongoing PhDs) and guided over 200 M.Tech and B.Tech students. She has a strong record of service to the academic community, notably serving as the Program Committee Chair for CVPR 2022, becoming the first researcher from India to hold this position in the conference's 40-year history. She regularly serves in leadership roles for premier conferences such as ICCV, ECCV, AAAI, and major biometrics venues. Dr. Debasis Das is currently working as an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering and Associate Faculty at the School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AIDE), as well as Coordinator of IoT and Applications (Inter-disciplinary Research Platform (IDRP) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. His research interests include Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs), Blockchain, the Internet of Things (IoT), Machine Learning (ML), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Quantum Technology. Dr. Das published 170 research papers in top international journals( Like IEEE Transactions, ACM Transactions, etc) and top B/A/A* Conferences. Dr. Das has 23 sponsored projects and 2 consultancy projects to his credit. He has been awarded the Early Career Research (ECR) Award, BRICS Young Scientist Award, Young Researcher Award-2024, DST-NSF Project Award 2025, NSTC Research Project Award 2025 from Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science & Technology (DST), MoE, NSF, and NSTC, respectively. He has many research collaborations with premier institutions in India and different universities across the globe. He has been engaged in different academic activities inside and outside the Institute. He has supervised 10 Ph.D. students, and 10 are currently pursuing their theses. He has also supervised more than 50 M.E./M.Tech. thesis. He is a senior member of IEEE and VTS and a professional member of ACM. Dr. Banerjee is curently working as an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of IIT Jodhpur. His research interests are broadly in the areas of high performance computing, big data analytics, accelerated computing, and computer architectures. Previously he was a post-doctoral researcher at the Network Based Computing Laboratory of The Ohio State University where he worked under the mentorship of Prof. Dhabaleswar K. Panda. Before that, he completed my Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) from International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad in 2014 where he worked under the guidance of Dr. Kishore Kothapalli. He was a part of the Center for Security, Theory, and Algorithmic Research (CSTAR) laboratory. His PhD research was broadly in High Performance Computing where he worked towards developing novel algorithms and implementations for heterogeneous computing platforms that could utilise multiple multi-core and many-core processors at the same time leading to better performance and higher system efficiency. Anand Mishra serves as a faculty member in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering. He leads the Vision, Language, and Learning Group (VL2G) at IIT Jodhpur, which focuses on problems at the intersection of†vision and language. Specifically, the group is focusing on video understanding, efficient vision and language models and multilinguality. Anand has made significant contributions to the field through influential resources and systems, including the†IIIT-5K†and†OCR-VQA†datasets, as well as†IndicPhotoOCR, an open-source OCR system for Indian language text in natural images. His research group has received support through various industry and government of India grants, including Microsoft Academic Partnership Grant (2021 and 2023), MeitY Grant on National Language Translation Mission, a research grant from HealthcareNLP, a Gift Grant from Accenture, and a Start-up Research Grant from SERB, Govt. of India. Anand is an active reviewer for top-tier computer vision, language and AI venues, and his reviewing contributions have been recognized with†Outstanding Reviewer Awards at ICCV 2021 and CVPR 2023.†He served as†Program Co-Chair for ICVGIP 2025†and is currently serving as an†Area Chair for CVPR 2026 and ECCV 2026. Angshuman Paul is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science & Engineering at IIT Jodhpur. His research primarily focuses on the development of deep learning techniques for the synthesis and analysis of medical images, aiming to advance affordable healthcare solutions. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, he served as a postdoctoral fellow at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), USA. Since March 2025, Dr Jain is an assistant professor at the CSE department of IIT Jodhpur. In June 2025, Dr Jain, recevied DST INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship Grant for five years. Before joining academics, he was in industrial research at Hitachi Rail, Berlin for little over two years. There Dr Jain led R&D projects dealing with digitalization in the railway domain, including a patent in Digital Twin. For his PhD at Technical University Berlin, he worked on Deep Learning Mesh Parameterization of 3D Shapes for various applications. During his PhD, he developed 3D data registration softwares for medical instrument manufacturing companies. His focus areas include 3D Computer Vision, Edge AI, VR/AR Visualization amongst othersI am Assistant Professor at IIT, Jodhpur in the department of Computer Science and Engineering. I graduated with Ph.D. with Cybersecurity in the department of Computer Science and Engineering at The Ohio State University (OSU) in Summer 2024. My advisors are†Dr. Zhiqiang Lin†and†Dr. Yinqian Zhang. I graduated from Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur (MNIT) with the Bachelor in Technology of Computer Engineering in 2013. My Bachelor theis project was supervised by†Dr. Manoj Singh Gaur.
†I am interested in research areas of Automated Formal Verification, System Security and Privacy, Trusted Execution Environment, Cryptography and Protocol Design
I am an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at IIT Jodhpur.
In 2020, I obtained my PhD in Computer†Science from the University of Iowa, advised by†Prof. Kasturi Varadarajan. Then,†during 2020-2023, I was a postdoctoral researcher at University of Bergen, where I was hosted by†Prof. Saket Saurabh.†
I am interested in theoretical computer science in general, but in particular this includes design of approximation and parameterized algorithms for clustering and geometric optimization problems
Biography
Prof Debnath is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur. She joined IIT jodhpur as an assistant professor in 2013. Before joining Jodhpur, she worked as a post doctoral fellow in Goethe-Universit‰t, Frankfurt, Germany in 2013 for a short duration. Prior to that she worked as a Max Planck post dostoral fellow at Max Planck Institute of Polymer Science, Mainz, Germany from 2009-2012. She was a research associate at Department of Chemical Engineering and Department of Physics in Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Bangalore from 2007-2009. She obtained her PhD from Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry from IISc Bangalore in 2008 under the supervision of Prof K. L. Sebastian.
†
Research
Prof Debnathís current research broadly envisages on understanding of biological processes using principles of classical statistical mechanics. Her group uses modeling tools ranging from multi-scale modeling, molecular dynamics simulations combined with machine learning techniques to study the structure, thermodynamics and dynamics of proteins, lipids, water at the micro and meso-scale as well as the analytical theory at the macro-scale to investigate different processes involving biological chain and macromolecules.† The group is particularly interested in
* Water dynamics near soft and bio molecules
* Structure and Dynamics of Biological Membranes
* Trans-membrane and Peripheral Proteins
* Protein-Ligand Binding
* Dynamics and Reaction Rates of Activated Processes involving Polymers
* Glass Transitions and Dynamical Heterogeneity in Biomembranes
* Self-assembly of Bio-inspired Soft Materials†
* Atul Kumar received his B.Sc. degree in Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Banaras Hindu University, in 1999, and his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras, in 2004, with a focus on theoretical chemistry. He completed his Ph.D. in 2010 at the Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras (IITM), specializing in Quantum Information and Computation. He joined IIT Jodhpur in March 2012, where he is currently a Professor in the Department of Chemistry. His research group is interested in exploring the frontiers of quantum computing in the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) era, focusing on algorithm development, quantum entanglement, and strategies to manage noise and errors. A key aspect of our work involves leveraging quantum methods to tackle challenges in computational chemistry and open quantum dynamics.
* Research
* Over the past three decades, quantum technology has garnered significant public and scientific attention, driven by sustained efforts from†both academia and industry to bring quantum information and computation to the forefront of technological advancement. The paradigm shift from classical to quantum computing holds the promise of solving classically intractable problems more efficiently. However, the presence of quantum noise and limitations in circuit sizeócharacteristic of the current noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) eraópose substantial challenges to realizing the full potential of fault-tolerant quantum computing.
* Our research group is actively engaged in addressing several key challenges in quantum information and computation within the constraints of the NISQ era. Our interests include computational chemistry in the realm of quantum computation, the classification and quantification of multiqubit entanglement and nonlocality, the development of efficient quantum algorithms for a range of applications, error mitigation strategies, and the study of open quantum systems.
* Dr. Dibyendu K. Sasmal is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, where he has been serving since July 2023, following his tenure as an Assistant Professor from 2019 to 2023. His academic journey began with a Bachelor of Science (Honors) in Chemistry from Medinipur College, Vidyasagar University, in 2005, followed by a Master of Science (M.Sc.) in Chemistry with a specialization in Physical Chemistry in 2007. He earned his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry in 2012 from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, under the guidance of Professor Kankan Bhattacharyya. Post-Ph.D., he conducted postdoctoral research at Bowling Green State University, Ohio, USA, with Professor H. Peter Lu, followed by research at the Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, under Professor Jun Huang, and later at the Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, Illinois, with Professor Tijana Rajh.
* Research
* Dr. Sasmal and his group is interested to understand complex interplay among structure, function, and dynamics of bio-molecules present either in condensed phase or cellular environment at single molecular level in real-time. Conventional ensemble methods can only give information related to molecular function which are average of property with respect to time. However, single-molecule spectroscopy has an unique capabilities for distinguishing molecular properties with spatiotemporal resolution of sub-nano meter and pico-seconds. Their approach is highly interdisciplinary combining molecular spectroscopy, molecular biology, optics and advanced fluorescence microscopy. The group is currently investigating the pattern of conformational dynamics of DNA, protein and RNA. They are also trying to understand how immune cells distinguish between self and foreign antigens at single molecule level in real time. Drug-protein interaction in condensed phase, and development of quantum dot based drug carrier, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) are also topic of research for this group.†
Dr. Murarka pursued his PhD from WWU M¸nster under the supervision of Prof. Armido Studer. After completing his Ph.D. (2013), he worked as a Max-Planck postdoctoral research fellow in the laboratory of Prof. Herbert Waldmann at Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Dortmund (2013-2016). Following a year-long stay (2016-2017) as a Team Leader in a reputed pharmaceutical company, Syngene International Limited, he decided to return to academia. In May 2017, he joined the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India, as an Assistant Professor and was promoted to the post of Associate Professor in June 2022.
He is a recipient of the prestigious ëInstitute Senior Researcher Award (Science Category)í by IIT Jodhpur, ëThe Early Career Research Awardí by SERB, Government of India, ëThe Thieme Chemistry Journal Awardí by Thieme, and ëThe Merck Young Scientist Awardí by Merck. He is an Early Career Advisory Board Member (ECAB) of several journals, such as ChemistrySelect (Wiley-VCH), Chemistry an Asian Journal (Wiley-VCH), and Organic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC). He is also a Fellow of the Indian Chemical Society (FICS) and a Member of the Royal Society of Chemistry (MRSC).
Research
Dr. Murarkaís current research activities include the study of novel activation modes and the development of chemoselective and sustainable synthetic transformations. His research group utilizes sustainable chemical tools, such as base-metal catalysis, photocatalysis, and electro-organic synthesis, to convert feedstock chemicals to value-added compounds and pharmaceutically relevant molecular architectures. The thrust areas of research in his group include:
* Radical Chemistry
* Photoinduced Synthetic Transformations
* Electrochemistry in Organic Synthesis
* Transition Metal Catalyzed Cross-Couplings
* C-H Functionalizations
* Medicinal Chemistry
Biography
Dr. Monika Gupta completed her B.Sc. and M.Sc. from the University of Delhi. She earned her Ph.D. in 2018 from IISER Mohali, where she worked under the mentorship of Prof. Santanu Kumar Pal on the development of novel discotic liquid crystals for optoelectronic applications. She subsequently pursued postdoctoral research at The University of Tokyo (2018ñ2020) and the Institute for Basic Sciences, Seoul (2020ñ2021). In 2021, Dr. Gupta was awarded the prestigious Ramanujan Fellowship and worked at IIT Ropar until February 2025. Currently, she is an Assistant Professor at IIT Jodhpur, where her research focuses on organic functional materials, with a particular emphasis on visible light-responsive liquid crystals for applications such as solar thermal fuels. Dr. Gupta has been recognized with several accolades, including the IUCr Young Scientist Award (2016), the SERB-ITS Grant (2016 and 2024), the WISER Grant (2023), and the JLCS Award (2023). Her work continues to contribute significantly to the advancement of multifunctional materials for both scientific exploration and industrial innovation.
Research
Her current research primarily focuses on the molecular design and synthesis of functional organic materials, strategically integrating visible-light-responsive photoswitches into liquid crystalline (LC) architectures to optimize solar energy utilization, bypassing the limitations of low UV irradiance. Synthesized compounds are systematically characterized to elucidate structure-property relationships.†
The current central research objectives encompass:†
* Enhancing solar-thermal energy conversion efficiency by optimizing photoisomerization kinetics and maximizing the population of metastable isomers;†
* Extending the half-life of these metastable states to improve energy storage duration;†
* Achieving controlled and efficient heat release through manipulation of LC mesophases and dopant concentrations; and
* Expanding the operational temperature range of STFs to include sub-zero environments.


language understanding (NLU) capabilities requires modeling human cognition because natural, unedited utterances regularly contain ambiguities, ellipses, production errors, implicatures, and many other types of complexities. Moreover, cognitive agents must be nimble in the face of incomplete interpretations since even people do not perfectly understand every aspect of every utterance they hear. So, once an agent has reached the best interpretation it can, it must determine how to proceed – be that acting upon the new information directly, remembering an incomplete interpretation and waiting to see what happens next, seeking out information to fill in the blanks, or asking its interlocutor for clarification. The reasoning needed to support NLU extends far beyond language itself, including, non-exhaustively, the agent’s understanding of its own plans and goals; its dynamic modeling of its interlocutor’s knowledge, plans, and goals, all guided by a theory of mind; its recognition of diverse aspects human behavior, such as affect, cooperative behavior, and the effects of cognitive biases; and its integration of linguistic interpretations with its interpretations of other perceptive inputs, such as simulated vision and non-linguistic audition. Considering all of these needs, it seems hardly possible that fundamental NLU will ever be achieved through the kinds of knowledge-lean text-string manipulation being pursued by the mainstream natural language processing (NLP) community. Instead, it requires a holistic approach to cognitive modeling of the type we are pursuing in a paradigm called OntoAgent. The success of the large neural language models on many NLP tasks is exciting. However, we find that these successes sometimes lead to hype in which these models are being described as “understanding” language or capturing “meaning”. In this position paper, we argue that a system trained only on form has a priori no way to learn meaning. In keeping with the ACL 2020 theme of “Taking Stock of Where We’ve Been and Where We’re Going”, we argue that a clear understanding of the distinction between form and meaning will help guide the field towards better science around natural language understanding
As more users across the world are interacting with dialog agents in their daily life, there is a need for better speech understanding that calls for renewed attention to the dynamics between research in automatic speech recognition (ASR) and natural language understanding (NLU). We briefly review these research areas and lay out the current relationship between them. In light of the observations we make in this article, we argue that (1) NLU should be cognizant of the presence of ASR models being used upstream in a dialog system’s pipeline, (2) ASR should be able to learn from errors found in NLU, (3) there is a need for end-to-end data sets that provide semantic annotations on spoken input, (4) there should be stronger collaboration between ASR and NLU research communitiesThe academic environment at IIT Jodhpur fosters a culture of inquiry, innovation, and interdisciplinary collaboration. Students entering IITJ are exposed to a curriculum that balances theoretical rigor with practical implementation across engineering, science, and humanities disciplines. The institute emphasizes analytical thinking, computational modeling, and research-based learning from the very first semester. Faculty members at IIT Jodhpur encourage students to question assumptions, explore emerging technologies, and contribute to knowledge creation through guided research projectsThe postgraduate programs at IITJ are structured to integrate advanced coursework with laboratory experimentation and thesis development. Students specializing in data science, artificial intelligence, mechanical systems, or biosciences engage in seminars that explore both foundational theory and modern applications. Research scholars at IIT Jodhpur often collaborate with national laboratories and international universities to address complex societal challenges. The institute’s research infrastructure includes high-performance computing clusters, specialized instrumentation facilities, and innovation labs designed to support experimentationA strong emphasis is placed on mathematical modeling and algorithm design within various departments at IITJ. Students learn optimization techniques, probability theory, and statistical inference to solve real-world problems. Coursework often includes case studies derived from industry scenarios, enabling learners to bridge the gap between academic concepts and professional practice. The learning ecosystem at IIT Jodhpur promotes intellectual independence while maintaining rigorous evaluation standards.Research initiatives at IITJ frequently focus on sustainable development, renewable energy systems, advanced materials, and intelligent computing frameworks. Faculty-led projects explore topics such as smart grid optimization, biomedical signal processing, and autonomous systems. The collaborative atmosphere at IIT Jodhpur allows researchers from different departments to share methodologies and experimental results. Interdisciplinary research meetings often result in joint publications and funded proposals.The doctoral community at IITJ plays a vital role in advancing scientific knowledge. Scholars contribute to peer-reviewed journals, present findings at international conferences, and mentor junior students in laboratory practices. Research training includes coursework on academic writing, ethical considerations in experimentation, and data reproducibility. IIT Jodhpur encourages open dialogue during research colloquia, ensuring constructive feedback and continuous improvement.Educational innovation remains central to the philosophy of IITJ. Blended learning models incorporate digital resources, simulation platforms, and collaborative tools. Students participate in hackathons, design challenges, and innovation competitions organized within IIT Jodhpur. Exposure to entrepreneurship is facilitated through incubation centers that support startup initiatives emerging from campus research.The campus environment at IITJ integrates modern infrastructure with sustainable planning. Energy-efficient buildings, solar installations, and water conservation systems reflect a commitment to environmental responsibility. Students at IIT Jodhpur engage in community outreach programs that apply technical knowledge to societal development. Workshops on ethical technology deployment emphasize responsible innovation.In advanced computing courses at IITJ, learners explore neural networks, distributed architectures, and large-scale data analytics. Laboratory sessions involve implementing machine learning algorithms and evaluating performance metrics. Students often conduct experiments comparing optimization techniques such as stochastic gradient descent and adaptive learning strategies. IIT Jodhpur provides access to computing resources that enable large dataset processing and model evaluation.Research in materials science at IITJ investigates nanostructured compounds, polymer composites, and advanced fabrication techniques. Experimental characterization methods include spectroscopy, microscopy, and thermal analysis. Faculty members at IIT Jodhpur guide students in designing controlled experiments and interpreting empirical data. Collaboration with industrial partners supports the translation of laboratory findings into practical applications.The academic calendar at IITJ follows a structured semester system that includes lectures, tutorials, laboratory work, and comprehensive assessments. Continuous evaluation methods encourage consistent engagement rather than last-minute preparation. IIT Jodhpur places importance on academic integrity and transparent grading policies. Students receive detailed feedback to improve conceptual understanding.Scholars studying artificial intelligence at IITJ examine natural language processing, reinforcement learning, and probabilistic graphical models. Research groups analyze large corpora to understand semantic representation and contextual embeddings. At IIT Jodhpur, discussions often explore the theoretical underpinnings of activation functions and optimization dynamics. Graduate seminars examine the implications of algorithmic bias and model interpretability.The institute library at IITJ maintains an extensive collection of digital journals, conference proceedings, and doctoral theses. Access to global research databases enhances literature review quality. Students at IIT Jodhpur develop critical reading skills by analyzing contemporary publications. Workshops on citation management and academic writing support scholarly productivity.In the domain of mechanical engineering, IITJ researchers study fluid dynamics, robotics, and thermal systems. Experimental setups include wind tunnels, additive manufacturing units, and vibration analysis laboratories. Projects at IIT Jodhpur often integrate computational simulations with physical prototyping. Students gain experience in designing experiments and validating numerical predictions.Environmental research at IITJ addresses climate resilience, sustainable urban planning, and resource optimization. Faculty members collaborate with policymakers to develop data-driven solutions. IIT Jodhpur supports field studies that assess environmental impact and ecological sustainability. Graduate researchers analyze datasets related to air quality, renewable integration, and water management.The culture at IITJ values mentorship and peer collaboration. Senior students guide juniors through academic transitions and research opportunities. IIT Jodhpur organizes orientation programs that introduce newcomers to laboratory safety and academic expectations. Faculty advisors maintain open communication channels to support intellectual growth.Contemporary research articles emphasize the importance of scalable algorithms for high-dimensional data. Increasing dataset diversity enhances model generalization and reduces overfitting. Empirical studies demonstrate that representation learning benefits from heterogeneous corpora. Statistical validation methods such as cross-validation and bootstrap sampling improve reliability.Optimization theory plays a central role in computational modeling. Convex analysis provides guarantees for convergence under specific constraints. Nonlinear optimization methods address complex objective landscapes. Gradient-based learning algorithms adapt parameters iteratively to minimize loss functions.Advancements in computer vision rely on hierarchical feature extraction mechanisms. Convolutional architectures capture spatial correlations effectively. Transfer learning reduces computational cost by leveraging pretrained weights. Model evaluation incorporates confusion matrices and area-under-curve metrics.Natural language processing research explores contextual embeddings and attention mechanisms. Sequence models learn dependencies across tokens. Large-scale language corpora improve semantic representation quality. Regularization techniques mitigate overfitting during training.Cybersecurity research examines encryption algorithms and secure communication protocols. Authentication frameworks prevent unauthorized access. Network anomaly detection systems identify potential threats. Continuous monitoring ensures data protection integrity.Technological innovation influences economic development. Digital transformation reshapes supply chains and customer engagement strategies. Data-driven decision making improves operational efficiency. Organizations invest in research to maintain competitiveness.Sustainable energy research promotes solar integration and wind resource optimization. Smart grid analytics enhance load balancing. Energy storage technologies address intermittency challenges. Policy frameworks encourage renewable adoption.Healthcare analytics leverages predictive modeling for disease detection. Medical imaging analysis utilizes convolutional networks. Personalized treatment strategies depend on patient data integration. Ethical standards govern clinical data usage.Urban planning incorporates intelligent transportation systems. Traffic modeling improves congestion management. Sensor networks collect environmental data. Smart infrastructure enhances quality of life.Education evolves through digital platforms and collaborative tools. Virtual classrooms expand accessibility. Interdisciplinary curricula promote holistic learning. Lifelong education supports professional adaptability.Entrepreneurship ecosystems foster innovation-driven startups. Incubation programs provide mentorship and funding access. Market analysis guides product development strategies. Sustainable business models prioritize social responsibility.Scientific communication emphasizes clarity and reproducibility. Peer review ensures methodological rigor. Transparent data sharing enhances credibility. Collaborative networks accelerate discovery.Artificial intelligence ethics examines fairness and accountability. Bias mitigation strategies improve algorithmic justice. Transparent reporting builds public trust. Responsible deployment prevents unintended consequences.Advanced statistical modeling addresses uncertainty quantification. Bayesian inference integrates prior knowledge. Monte Carlo simulations approximate complex distributions. Sensitivity analysis evaluates parameter robustness.Distributed computing frameworks manage large-scale data processing. Parallel architectures enhance computational speed. Cloud platforms provide scalable infrastructure. Resource allocation algorithms optimize performance.Robotics research integrates perception, planning, and control. Autonomous navigation systems interpret sensor data. Human-robot interaction emphasizes safety. Experimental validation ensures reliability.Computational biology applies machine learning to genomic analysis. Pattern recognition identifies biomarkers. Data integration supports personalized medicine. Interdisciplinary collaboration accelerates biomedical innovation.Financial analytics utilizes predictive models for risk assessment. Time-series forecasting informs investment strategies. Portfolio optimization balances return and volatility. Regulatory compliance ensures market stability.Agricultural technology leverages data analytics for crop monitoring. Precision farming optimizes resource usage. Remote sensing provides real-time insights. Sustainable practices enhance productivity.Communication networks evolve with high-speed connectivity. Signal processing improves transmission quality. Protocol design ensures interoperability. Emerging technologies expand digital inclusion.The integration of multidisciplinary knowledge strengthens problem-solving capacity. Academic institutions cultivate critical reasoning. Research ecosystems promote continuous advancement. Innovation emerges through collaborative effort.IIT Jodhpur continues to expand its research footprint through strategic partnerships and industry collaboration. IITJ fosters a dynamic academic culture that integrates technology, sustainability, and societal engagement. Students at IIT Jodhpur contribute to research publications, prototype development, and policy analysis. The vision of IITJ emphasizes transformative education grounded in rigorous scholarship.IIT Jodhpur supports interdisciplinary centers focusing on artificial intelligence, biosciences, and advanced manufacturing. Collaborative workshops at IITJ bring together scholars from diverse backgrounds. The academic environment at IIT Jodhpur encourages resilience, adaptability, and innovation. Through sustained research efforts, IITJ contributes meaningfully to national and global development. A commonsensical idea about the difficult task of getting computers to understand human language would be that the job would involve crucial input from linguistics. Linguistics is, after all, the scientific study of language, and linguists have developed theories of the relation between form (words, sentences, etc.) and meaning. The investigation of form falls primarily into the domains of morphology (concerning the form of words) and syntax (concerning the structure of phrases and sentences), while the analysis of meaning belongs to the domains of semantics (roughly, the meanings of words, phrases and sentences) and pragmatics (roughly, inferred meanings based on the use of language). The best known theories of the structure of language have been proposed by Noam Chomsky of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Chomsky’s theories have dominated linguistics since the 1960’s and been highly influential throughout the field of cognitive science, which Chomsky helped to create. The answer to this question can be found in changes in linguistic theory initiated by Chomsky in the 1970’s and 1980’s. In his earliest models, from the 1950’s and 1960’s, syntactic rules were procedural in nature, e.g. ‘move a question word like who to the beginning of the sentence in a question’, and the approach to the creation of a sentence was a derivation consisting of a series of procedural operations. Such a sequence of procedures could readily 1 be modeled by a computer algorithm. However, the goals for linguistic theory that Chomsky championed did not include modeling how sentences are actually constructed or interpreted by speakers in real time. He proposed a distinction between linguistic competence, a native speaker’s knowledge of the grammar of his/her native language, and linguistic performance, the application of this competence in actual situations. Linguistic theory, Chomsky maintained, concerns itself exclusively with the investigation of linguistic competence and its acquisition by children; only when competence had been fully understood and described could performance be studied. The primary data used in the study of competence are a native speaker’s judgements as to whether a particular sentence is grammatical or not. Given this focus on grammatical competence, the system of procedural rules was shown to be extremely problematic as a means for modeling it, and Chomsky turned to what has come to be knownvThis brief discussion of the linking system highlights another important feature of RRG in contrast with statistical systems: multilinguality is an inherent feature of RRG. No linguistic theory is designed to deal with only one language, but RRG is especially strong in this regard, since from its inception it was designed to deal with so-called ‘exotic’ languages, e.g. Philippine, Papuan, Native American and Australian Aboriginal languages. Statistical systems are by definition monolingual, as they are trained on data sets from a single language, yielding statistical patterns that apply to that language only. In order to deal with more than one language, an NLP system is typically trained on parallel corpora in the two languages under consideration, yielding statistical correlations that can be compared across them. The result is not true multilingual processing but rather ‘multi-parallel-monolingual’ processing. Contrast this with the RRG system. First, the linking algorithm for each language is worked out, and there are a lot of cross-linguistically valid principles and generalizations in the theory, which means that one is not starting from scratch with each new language. Second, going from one language to another is mediated by the meanings expressed; this is summarized in the following figure (‘LA’ stands for ‘linking algorithm’). It is often observed in knowledge-centric tasks (e.g., common sense question and answering, relation classification) that the integration of external knowledge such as entity representation into language models can help provide useful information to boost the performance. However, it is still unclear whether this benefit can extend to general natural language understanding (NLU) tasks. In this work, we empirically investigated the contribution of external knowledge by measuring the end-to-end performance of language models with various knowledge integration methods. We find that the introduction of knowledge can significantly improve the results on certain tasks while having no adverse effects on other tasks. We then employ mutual information to reflect the difference brought by knowledge and a neural interpretation model to reveal how a language model utilizes external knowledge. Our study provides valuable insights and guidance for practitioners to equip NLP models with knowledge. Today, artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) have dramatically advanced in various industries, especially medicine. AI describes computational programs that mimic and simulate human intelligence, for example, a person’s behavior in solving problems or his ability for learning. Furthermore, ML is a subset of artificial intelligence. It extracts patterns from raw data automatically. The purpose of this paper is to help researchers gain a proper understanding of machine learning and its applications in healthcare. In this paper, we first present a classification of machine learning-based schemes in healthcare. According to our proposed taxonomy, machine learning-based schemes in healthcare are categorized based on data pre-processing methods (data cleaning methods, data reduction methods), learning methods (unsupervised learning, supervised learning, semi-supervised learning, and reinforcement learning), evaluation methods (simulation-based evaluation and practical implementation-based evaluation in real environment) and applications (diagnosis, treatment). According to our proposed classification, we review some studies presented in machine learning applications for healthcare. We believe that this review paper helps researchers to familiarize themselves with the newest research on ML applications in medicine, recognize their challenges and limitations in this area, and identify future research directions. Empowering machines for learning like humans is similar to a dream because machines are not inherently intelligent [16,18]. There are some differences between humans and machines when performing their works, one of these differences is intelligence. This means that humans can learn from their previous experiences, but machines do not have this ability. In fact, they must be programmed to follow certain instructions [25,33]. Today, machine learning allows computers to learn from experiences. In the past, traditional computational algorithms included a set of programmed instructions explicitly, which is called “Hard coded”. Computers used these instructions to solve a problem, while today, machine learning helps computers to learn decision-making rules, so that there is no need for programmers who manually develop these rules [34,35]. This is called “Soft coded”. Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence (AI). ML-based machines are more intelligent and do not need human intervention. In fact, the term “smart machine” is a symbol [36]. It refers to machine learning and its goals. In 1995, Allan Turing expresses the question for the first time: “Can a machine think?”. He introduced a test called the “Turing Test”. This test evaluates a machine based on intelligence [37,38]. Today, there are various definitions of machine learning. For example, Arthur Samuel defines machine learning as “a study field that allows computers to learn without explicit programming” [39]. Ethem Alpaydin also defines machine learning as “an area for programming computers based on data samples or experience to improve a performance criterion” [40]. In the phrase “machine learning”, “learning” represents the search process in the possible representation space to create the best representation based on available data [41,42]. Furthermore, “machine” refers to an algorithm that performs search operations. This algorithm is a combination of mathematics and logic [41,42]. In general, the purpose of machine learning is to answer the question: “How can a computer program be made using historical data to solve a problem and automatically improve the performance of the program using experience?” [43,44]. In fact, machine learning is a technology for designing computational algorithms that imitate human intelligence and learn from the surrounding environment. In machine learning, a system is made and trained using a large amount of data (millions of data samples) to manage very complicated tasks. The purpose of this model is to decide, predict or perform tasks without explicit programming. When this model takes inputs, it must be able to produce the desired output. Sometimes, humans can easily understand this model. However, in some cases, it is similar to a black box. This means that humans cannot easily understand this model. In fact, this model approximates the process, which must be imitated by a machine [20,45]. Machine learning has many applications in healthcare. It can facilitate time-consuming and complex tasks in this area. Today, the rapid and significant progress in machine learning (ML), designing faster processors, and accessing digital health data have created opportunities to improve the healthcare process. These new technologies reduce costs, accelerate proper drug discovery, and improve the therapeutic results. Today, machine learning is attracting investors and the main players in the healthcare field [46]. In general, ML applications in the medical area can be divided into three categories:First Category-Improving Available Medical Structures: These applications are the simplest ML applications in the medical domain. They improve the performance of existing structures [47,48]. These ML-based technologies define specific and rule-based tasks for common applications such as simulation and data confirmation. Classifying digital medical images in healthcare services is one of these machine learning applications. It improves the accuracy of traditional image processing techniques. Machine learning can also be used to analyze radiological images to predict whether there is a particular disease or not. Moreover, ML can be used to evaluate retinal images to determine whether patients are subject to visual threats or not. For example, Aindra is a medical company based on artificial intelligence and machine learning. It uses an ML-based platform to classify medical images. Its purpose is to diagnose cancers in a more accurate and faster manner.Second Category-Upgrading Medical Structures: In this category, machine learning applications provide structures with new abilities. They move towards personalization. Precision medicine is one of these ML applications [8,49]. It is a kind of medical treatment that targets the specific needs of a person based on her or his characteristics (for example, the genetic arrangement of the person). For example, iCarbonx is moving towards personalized healthcare services. For this, it uses large datasets, biotechnology, and artificial intelligence.Third Category-Independent Medical Structures: This category of ML applications is expanding recently. They create the ML-based models to perform their actions independently based on pre-defined goals [11]. For example, one of the future applications in the healthcare field is to build a hospital without physicians [37,38]. As a result, we must prepare ourselves for a robotic future based on machine learning and artificial intelligence. Therefore, we must plan the role of robots in future hospitals. In the near future, robots will carry out all healthcare processes from diagnosis to surgery. Today, in developed countries such as China, Korea, and the United States, robots help surgeons to do surgery in the operating room [50,51]. However, this new technology has some weaknesses and imperfections, but it is rapidly advancing and should still be developed. For example, the Mayo Clinic is moving towards a hospital without doctors. Currently, they design its components. However, these components should be sufficiently tested in terms of various standards. Today, surgeons use robots to improve the surgical process [52,53].The General Framework for Designing a Learning Model in MedicineIn this section, we introduce various phases for designing a learning model in the healthcare field. Note that the purpose of this section is that researchers understand how to design a learning model in medicine. We recommend researchers review and undertake more research in this area to achieve a deep understanding of and knowledge about learning models [18,21]. For designing a learning model in the healthcare field, we must consider five main phases: problem definition, dataset, data preprocessing, ML model development, and evaluation. These phases are shown in Figure 3. In the following, each of these phases is described in detail.


IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 31, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021 523

On-Array Compressive Acquisition in CMOS Image
Sensors Using Accumulated Spatial Gradients

Amandeep Kaur , Member, IEEE, Deepak Mishra , Member, IEEE, K. M. Amogh,
and Mukul Sarkar , Member, IEEE

Abstract— A compressive acquisition technique for on-array resultant image sensor is widely used in applications like
image compression is proposed in this paper. It capitalizes on bio-medical instruments, digital photography, mobile devices,
representation ability of accumulated spatial gradients of the and industrial and scientific research.
acquired scene. The local variations inferred from strength of
the accumulated gradients are used as cues to vary number In general, the speed and power of CMOS image sen-
of samples read through the image sensor readout. Such sam- sors (CIS) is limited by the column-parallel analog to digital
pling enables the reconstruction using traditional interpolation converter (ADC) [1]. To optimize the performance of imager,
techniques with desired quality. The proposed method is first various architecture level techniques [2]–[4] and circuit-level
verified using MATLAB simulations, where on an average, techniques [5]–[7] are reported in literature. However, a high
a compression of 87% is achieved, for a threshold of 40 intensity
levels. The images are reconstructed using nearest neighbour data rate obtained from large array sensors limits the perfor-
interpolation (NNI) method which results in a mean peak signal mance of these techniques and increases the overall power
to noise ratio (PSNR) value of 29.09 dB. The reconstructed images consumption. To reduce the total system power, on-chip
are further enhanced using deep convolutional neural network, compression is considered as an alternate which reduces the
which improves the PSNR to 32.46 dB. The biggest advantage total amount of data to be read from the pixel array [8].
of the proposed technique is low-complex hardware design. As a
proof of concept, a hardware implementation of the technique The most common compression techniques are predictive
is performed using discrete components. Pixel intensity values coding [9], wavelet-based image processing [10] and Discrete
of standard images are converted into analog voltages using a Cosine Transform (DCT) based image processing [11]. In [9],
data acquisition system and mapped in the input voltage range the value of a given pixel is predicted by calculating the mean
of 1.5 V −5.5 V. For a threshold of 3.8 V, the compression of upper and left neighbours. The predicted value as well as
of 81% - 83% is observed for the considered images. The
proposed technique is simple and effective, and is suitable for prediction error are measured in the analog domain and then
low-power complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) converted into digital domain using ADC. In [10], the image
image sensors. is divided into N × N blocks. Subsequently, Harr wavelet

Index Terms— On-array compression, CMOS image sen- is used to separate the low frequency and high frequency
sors, nearest neighbour interpolation, deep convolution neural information and reduce the data rate. In [11], [12], the pixels
network. are divided into block size of 8 × 8 pixels. The digitized

data from the ADC is first stored in memory and then
arranged for parallel image compression processing element

I. INTRODUCTION (ICPE). The two-dimensional DCT algorithm inherently uses

W ITH the advancement in technology, the demand for 1D DCT structure with 32 multiplication and addition units to
high resolution and high frame rate camera using perform compression. However, 32 clock cycles are required

on-chip image processing elements is increasing. Complemen- for the 2D DCT computation of 8 × 8 block. All the above
tary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology allows compression techniques use off-array compression circuit,
the integration of image sensor with image processing circuits which need high bandwidth readout and, therefore, consume
which improves the overall performance of the camera. The power. Further, the pixel data values are buffered during

readout phase, which also increases the storage requirement.
Manuscript received October 2, 2019; revised January 20, 2020 and An alternative approach, known as compressive acquisition,

March 25, 2020; accepted April 13, 2020. Date of publication April 21, 2020;
date of current version February 4, 2021. This article was recommended by is gaining popularity these days. In compressive acquisition the
Associate Editor X. Li. (Amandeep Kaur and Deepak Mishra contributed compression is performed during image capturing phase and
equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Amandeep Kaur.) only compressed data is stored which relaxes the constraints

Amandeep Kaur is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT
Jodhpur, Jodhpur 342037, India (e-mail: amandeepkaur@iitj.ac.in). on readout circuitry, for example [13]–[15].

Deepak Mishra is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineer- In [13], a pixel is compared with its right neighbour using
ing, IIT Jodhpur, Jodhpur 342037, India (e-mail: dmishra@iitj.ac.in). a comparator. If the difference between the two pixels is

K. M. Amogh is with the Electronics and Communication Department, PES
University, Bengaluru 560085, India (e-mail: aamogh.amo@gmail.com). greater than a predefined threshold, the pixel is read, otherwise

Mukul Sarkar is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi, the previous pixel value is copied to obtain the value of
New Delhi 110016, India (e-mail: msarkar@ee.iitd.ac.in). present pixel. A data rate of 10% - 236% higher than the

Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available
online at https://ieeexplore.ieee.org. conventional ADC is achieved for an 8×8 pixel array. In [15],

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2020.2989359 a superpixel based compression is proposed where a given
1051-8215 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.

See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



524 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 31, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021

pixel is compared with its right and bottom neighbour. The N intervals such that
pixels with similar information are grouped together to form
a superpixel and only one pixel corresponding to superpixel is ψ̂(s) = ψi for s ∈ [xi , xi−1), i = 1 . . . N (1)

read. The image is reconstructed using bilinear interpolation where ψ̂(s) is a piecewise continuous representation of ψ(s)
instead of copying the data, resulting in better image quality. with constant value ψi in interval [xi , xi−1). For a given row,
On an average, the technique results in 33% power saving ψi also represents the value of i th pixel. Error between ψ(s)
for 70% compression with 512 × 512 pixel array. The above and ψ̂(s) can be calculated as
mentioned techniques fall under the category of adaptive ( ) ∑N ∫
sampling where the sampling distribution is adaptive to the 1 xi ( )

err ψ, ψ̂ = ψ(s) − 2
ψ̂(s) ds (2)

signal itself [16]–[18]. Fundamental idea behind adaptive sam- S
i=1 i xi−1

pling of images is to exploit redundancy among the pixels ∑N ∫
= 1 xi

to limit the number of samples (pixels) and simulate human (ψ(s)− ψi )
2 ds (3)

vision [19]. i= S
1. i xi−1

In this paper, an on-array compressive acquisition technique
is proposed, where the acquisition process is adaptive to the where Si is length of the interval [xi , xi−1). Error associated

with i th
signal. The proposed technique makes use of local variations pixel is ∫
inferred from strength of the local gradients to limit the xi

erri = 1
(ψ(s)− ψ 2

i ) ds (4)
number of samples acquired. A given pixel is compared Si xi−1
with its right neighbour to measure spatial gradient. The Equation (4) is mean square err∫or which is minimum for
spatial gradients are accumulated over number of cycles
and compared with a reference threshold. The pixels are ψi = ψ∗

i = 1 xi
ψ(s)ds (5)

skipped until the accumulated gradient becomes larger than Si xi−1
the threshold. Once a pixel is read, the process is reset for Let us now take the first order Taylor series approximation of
the subsequent pixels. The proposed compressive acquisition ψ(s) around the center of i th interval, ci  1

2. (xi + xi−1) as
technique requires a low-complex hardware design, which uses
first order spatial gradients. The gradients are obtained using ψ(s) = ψ(ci )+ ψ (ci ).(s − ci ) (6)
conventional subtractor circuits and are accumulated using an where higher order terms are ignored for simplicity. Further,
integrator. As mentioned, the integrated gradients are used with our initial assumption of linearity, ψ∗

i is given as
to identify the pixels to be read through the image sensor
readout. This results in reduction of power consumption of ψ∗

i = ψ(ci ) (7)
the image sensor and improves its frame rate. The algorithm

which comes from the fact that for a linear function in a
is designed and simulated in UMC 180 nm CMOS process and

considered interval, average value is same as function value
verified in MATLAB. Further, the algorithm is implemented

at the center of the interval. Using (5), (6) and (7), (4) can be
in hardware using discrete components as a proof of concept.

modified as
The compressed images obtained through measurements are ∫ x
then reconstructed using nearest neighbour interpolation (NNI) i

erri = ψ (ci )
2

(s − ci )
3. ds (8)

and further enhanced using deep convolutional neural net- Si xi−1
work (CNN).

= ψ (ci )
4. (xi − xi−1)

3

In contrast to the techniques such as [13], the proposed . (9)
Si 12

technique avoids the possibility of error propagation and
loss of long streak of pixels by using accumulated spatial The interval length Si  xi − xi−1 can be used to rewrite (9)
gradients. Further, the CNN helps in qualitative enhancement as
of the reconstructed images. Rest of the paper is organized as (

ψ  )2

erri = (ci ).Si
follows. Section II discusses the proposed method. Section III (10)

12
presents an on-array compression, where the detailed circuit √ ∣∣ ∣

ψ 
√(ci ).Simplementation of the proposed method, designed and simu- i ∣

erri = (11)
lated in UMC 180 nm CMOS process, is discussed. Section IV 12
presents the simulation and experimental results. Further, Equation (11) is the square root error corresponding to the
the performance comparison of the proposed method with the i th spatial location. It shows that at each location, the error
state-of-the-art is also presented in this section. Section V increases with increasing value of spatial gradient and interval
presents the discussions and section VI concludes the paper. length. If we assume a tolerance bound over the error, a large

interval can be considered for slow varying signal.
II. PROPOSED METHOD

Analogously, one may see that, in a given discrete image,
An image is a discrete representation of a continuous scene. if a pixel is discarded and recovered using linear interpolation

For high resolution image sensors, with small pixel pitch, between its neighbours, the error in the recovered value will
spatial variation between the consecutive pixels are reasonably be proportional to the gradient of the considered pixel. Further
linear. For an N × N dimension image, each row in the from (3), it can be seen that if multiple pixels are discarded
image represents a 1D continuous space (ψ(s)), divided into the total error will be proportional to the accumulated gradient.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



KAUR et al.: ON-ARRAY COMPRESSIVE ACQUISITION IN CIS USING ACCUMULATED SPATIAL GRADIENTS 525

results in an initial charge of (VS,1, j - Vcm ).C, where VS,1, j
is the signal integrated voltage. The reported charge ignores
the error due to charge sharing between the photo-diode
capacitance and the capacitor C . In the next phase, the photo-
diode is reset using transistor M1 and the switch M2 is opened,
which results in an output OU T1, j representing the difference

Fig. 1. Block diagram representing fundamental idea of the proposed between reset voltage and signal voltage with respect to
compressive acquisition technique. common potential Vcm . The pixel outputs of two consecutive

pixels are fed to the column-level comparator C M P1 and
subtractor circuit. The difference between the pixel voltages is

Thus, in the proposed method gradients are accumulated over
fed to the integrator circuit and compared with the threshold δ

the neighbouring pixels and the pixels are discarded until
using comparator C M PC . If the integrated difference is greater

the accumulation crosses a threshold. Accordingly, the pixels
than δ, the Flag bit is set (logic high) and the integrator is reset

of smooth regions in the acquired scene with low spatial
to its initial common mode potential, else the integrator keeps

variation/gradients are discarded more while the error being
on integrating the pixel difference for the next set of pixels.

limited by the considered threshold.
Once the Flag bit is set, the DDS voltage corresponding to the
pixel is read by the chip-level ADC as shown in the Fig. 2(a).

III. ON-ARRAY COMPRESSION The circuit diagram for the generation of absolute pixel
In the proposed compressive acquisition technique, the first difference is shown in Fig. 3. The analog outputs of the two

pixel is always read. For a given row, the outputs of two pixels (Vp1 and Vp2) are compared using comparator C M P1.
consecutive pixels are subtracted and compared with the The logic state of the digital bit Ppol decides the polarity
reference threshold (δ). If the difference between pixels or the of two pixels. If Ppol is logic high, the subtractor output ε
spatial gradient is greater than δ, the current pixel is read by represents Vp2 - Vp1. For the other case, when Ppol is logic
the ADC. On the other hand, if the difference between pixels low, the subtractor output ε represents Vp1 - Vp2. The decision
is less than threshold, the difference is accumulated using an bit Ppol , therefore, helps in generating the absolute difference
integrator circuit. between the two pixels. The inset of the modulus (MOD) cir-

The fundamental idea of the proposed technique is shown cuit is the subtractor which is shown in Fig. 4. The subtractor
in Fig. 1. The outputs of two pixels of a given row are consists of two equal value capacitors C1 and C2, an amplifier
represented by Vp1 and Vp2, respectively. The difference ε and switches. The subtraction is performed in two phases φ1
between the pixels is obtained using the subtractor circuit. and φ2 with the prior knowledge of polarity bit Ppol . In the
Due to difference in the intensity values, any one of the first phase, the signal φ1 is applied to sample the output of
pixel output can be greater or smaller than the other value. a given pixel on the top plate of capacitor C1 and the other
Considering the pixel polarity, an absolute value of spatial plate of capacitor is fixed to the common mode potential Vcm .
gradient is calculated. The difference in the pixel values is The switch φ1a is an advanced version of φ1 to reduce charge
accumulated over number of cycles using an integrator circuit. injection. In the second phase, the second pixel output is
For every cycle accumulation, the integrated spatial gradient applied to the capacitor C1 and the subtracted difference Vsub
is compared with the threshold δ. The comparator output sets appears at the output. In the same phase, the subtracted value
the flag bit high when accumulated value crosses δ. This resets is sampled on the integrator capacitor Cint1. The phases of
the integrator to the initial value (Vcm) and the integrator is integrator circuit are merged in such a way that when the
ready for the next set of pixel values. All the pixels with subtractor is sampling the new input, the integrator integrates
integrated difference less than the threshold are discarded the previous difference.
and not read. The number of discarded pixels depend on the The circuit diagram of the integrator circuit is shown
pixel content and, therefore, vary locally. Large amount of in Fig. 5 and its clock phases φ2 and φ3 are shown in Fig. 2(b).
compression and hence the power saving is achieved for the The integrated voltage Vint across Cint2 is then held using
low frequency images as compared to the images with high a holding capacitor Chold and compared with the threshold
frequency content. δ using the comparator C M PC to generate the flag bit,

The complete block diagram and the timing diagram of CIS as shown in Fig. 6. Once the integrated value crosses the
incorporating the proposed compressive acquisition technique threshold, flag bit achieves logic high state, which resets the
is shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respectively. It consists of a integrator to its initial state Vcm . The number of pixels with
pixel array, row decoder, column decoder, column-level com- integrated spatial gradient less than the reference threshold are
parator (CMP1), subtractor and chip-level readout, as shown in skipped and hence results in on-array compression. The image
Fig. 2(a). A standard three transistor pixel structure with inbuilt reconstruction is performed off-chip, which is discussed in the
delta sampling (DDS) [15] is used. Initially the switch M1 is following section.
opened to integrate the photo-diode and the signal integrated
voltage is sampled on the top plate of capacitor C . At the
same time, the switch M2 is closed using the control signal Off-Chip Image Reconstruction
C NT and the other plate of capacitor is fixed to the common The proposed compression method is motivated from first
reference voltage Vcm . The sampling phase approximately order Taylor series approximation of pixel intensities, thus a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



526 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 31, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021

Fig. 2. (a) represents block diagram of CMOS image sensor with proposed on array compressive acquisition technique. The column-level comparators are
represented by C M Pj , where the subscript j represents the j th column, (b) system level timings. An example representing integrated voltage Vint and the
corresponding Flag bit Flagi, j are also shown in the figure for better understanding.

Fig. 5. Circuit diagram of an integrator.

Fig. 3. Circuit implementing absolute difference or modulus (MOD)
operation.

Fig. 6. Sample and hold circuit followed by a comparator to generate flag
bit.

Fig. 4. Circuit diagram of subtractor.
convolutional layers. Fully connected and pooling layers are
also included depending on the final objective. CNNs have

natural choice of image reconstruction is interpolation. In this shown remarkable success in wide range of computer vision
work, NNI [20] is used due to an irregular distribution of tasks [23]–[25]. In this work, DSN-O network, reported in [25]
pixels being preserved or read. However, it is not limited to is used. DSN-O stands for a fully convolutional neural network
NNI, other approaches such as frequency selective reconstruc- with sub-problem specific deep supervision. It constructs a
tion [21] and matched wavelets [22] can also be used. feature pyramid and produces outputs at multiple scales which

To further enhance the quality of reconstructed images are fused at the end to produce the final output. DSN-O
obtained using NNI, CNN is considered. CNNs are feed- was designed for segmentation, therefore, sigmoid activation
forward multilayer neural networks which mainly contain were used to produce binary outputs. In the proposed method

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



KAUR et al.: ON-ARRAY COMPRESSIVE ACQUISITION IN CIS USING ACCUMULATED SPATIAL GRADIENTS 527

sigmoid is replaced with tanh activation to produce pixel TABLE I

values in the desired range. A training set of 400 images, same PEAK SIGNAL TO NOISE RATIO (PSNR) VALUES (IN DB) OBSERVED

as [15], is used to train the network. Each image is divided into FROM DIFFERENT IMAGES RECONSTRUCTED USING NNI AND LATER
ENHANCED USING DEEP CNN. PSNR VALUES RESULTED IN

overlapping patches of size 160×160 and total 13,725 samples BY OTHER METHODS ARE ALSO INCLUDED

are created. 75% samples are used for training and remaining
for validation. The network is trained using Adam optimizer
for 500 epochs with a learning rate of 10−3 and batchsize of 8.
Mean absolute error is used as the loss function for training.

IV. RESULTS

A. Simulation Results
The proposed compression and reconstruction methods are

first implemented in MATLAB and compared with the existing
on-array compression techniques. In addition, the on-array
compression details presented in Section III are realized in
UMC 180 nm CMOS process using Cadence to evaluate image
sensor performance.

1) MATLAB Simulation: The existing techniques considered
for comparison, such as [14], [15], rely on superpixels for
compression and differ each other in terms of image recon-
struction process. In [14], discarded pixels are recovered by
copying the neighbouring pixel values whereas in [15], bilinear
interpolation is used. The proposed method is also compared
with a recently reported compressive sensing technique [22]
(not an on-array compression technique) for completeness. The
comparison could not be performed with other techniques such
as [11], [26], due to unavailability of source codes.

Four standard images Boat (S1), H ouse (S2), Lena (S3),
and Peppers (S4), shown in Fig. 7(a), are considered for
comparison. All the images are of dimension 512×512 pixels.
The images are first compressed using the proposed method
for the threshold values of 20, 30, 40, and 50 intensity levels.
The compressed images are reconstructed using NNI and
subsequently enhanced using CNN. Observed performance
of the proposed method and comparison with the existing of the comparator are within ±2 mV for all the runs, which
techniques is summarized in Table I. The proposed method is less than half LSB (3.9 mV) of the ADC. Si√milarly,
outperforms the existing methods with a considerable mar- the noise o√f the integrator circuit varies from 0.12 mV/ H z to
gin. Further, CNN based enhancement provides additional 0.15 mV/ H z throughout the input range including process
1-2 dB improvement in peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR). and device mismatch. The offset of the op-amp plotted for
Compressed images obtained using the proposed method for 200 Monte Carlo runs is shown in Fig. 9. The offset variations
threshold value of 40 intensity levels are shown in Fig. 7(b). of the op-amp are within ±1 mV throughput the runs. The
On an average the method results in 87% compression for offset and the noise introduced by the circuits can reduce
the threshold value of 40 intensity levels. The corresponding the image resolution. Therefore, these circuits are designed
reconstructed images obtained using NNI and enhanced using to reduce the effects of offset as well as input referred
CNN are respectively shown in Fig. 7(c) and (d). A substantial noise.
qualitative improvement can be observed from the outputs of Further, the coupling due to metal wires during layout or
CNN shown in Fig. 7(d). switching from the neighbouring digital circuits can also result

2) Cadence Simulation: The proposed circuit is designed in unwanted switching [27] at the comparator (C M PC ) output
and simulated in UMC 180 nm CMOS process. The circuit (Fig. 6). Considering these effects, the reference voltage of
performing on-array compression consumes 78 μW of power C M PC is varied for ±Vth . If the output of the integrator circuit
at 1.8 V power supply. To understand the effect of noise is higher than δ, where δ = Vdc ± Vth , the polarity of Flag bit
and offset at the circuit level, Monte Carlo simulations are remains unchanged or unaltered. This ensures if the Flag bit is
performed. The total in√tegrated noise of t√he comparator circuit set, it happens due to higher accumulated value and not due to
varies from 3.91 μV/ H z to 3.97 μV/ H z throughout the noise. In this way, the effect of noise is explicitly considered
input range including device and process mismatch. The offset in the proposed compression technique.
of the comparator is plotted for 200 Monte Carlo runs as The performance comparison is shown in Table II. To eval-
shown in Fig. 8. The figure shows that the offset variations uate the performance, the parameter values corresponding to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



528 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 31, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021

Fig. 7. Observations of simulation experiment performed on standard images. (a) Standard test images, (b) compressed images obtained using the proposed
method for the threshold value of 40 intensity levels, (c) reconstructed images obtained using NNI, (d) enhancement of reconstructed images using CNN.

a similar reconstruction quality for different approaches are results using the same performance metrics of chip-level ADC
considered. As can be seen from the table, a comparatively as reported in [1].
higher compression is achieved for approximately same value
of PSNR. This reduces the total number of pixels to be read B. Experimental Results
and, therefore, results in effective power saving per pixel. Next we consider the suitability of the proposed method
Similar to [15], the proposed work compares the simulation for low-complex hardware design. As a proof of concept,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



KAUR et al.: ON-ARRAY COMPRESSIVE ACQUISITION IN CIS USING ACCUMULATED SPATIAL GRADIENTS 529

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON

Fig. 8. Comparator offset plotted for 200 Monte Carlo runs.

Fig. 10. Experimental setup.

Fig. 9. Op-amp offset plotted for 200 Monte Carlo runs.

the proposed technique is verified using discrete components.
The complete experimental setup is shown in Fig. 10.
Chip-level readout circuit for the proposed compression
technique is implemented on PCB using external discrete
components like comparators (LTC 1440), op-amps for sub-
tractor, integrator and buffers (LM 358N), capacitors of value Fig. 11. PSNR and amount of compression for Lena image with varying
4.7 pF, and transmission gates as switches (CD 4066). The threshold.
supply voltage to the components is provided using Agilent
supply. The inputs to the circuit under test is given using data
acquisition (DAQ) system and the analog and digital outputs increase in the amount of compression, as shown in Fig. 11.
are obtained using mixed signal oscilloscope MSO9104A. The figure also shows that PSNR reduces with increase in δ
The instruments are controlled using MATLAB and data is or increase in the amount of compression. Note that the edges
recorded in a personal computer. are reliably preserved even at the higher threshold, as shown

To begin with the experiments, first the effect of varying in Fig. 12. The reconstructed 128 × 128 Lena images using
threshold on PSNR and amount of compression is considered. NNI for varying threshold are shown in Fig. 13.
The experiments are performed on 128×128 Lena image. The Further, the standard images shown in Fig. 7(a) (S1 - S4)
standard grayscale intensity range (0 - 255) is mapped linearly along with a synthetic image and a thermal image from [32]
to a 4 V input range of 1.5 V to 5.5 V. Analog voltages corre- of size 512×512, respectively shown in left and right pane of
sponding to the pixel intensity values are generated using the Fig. 14, are used as test images to prove the functionality of
DAQ and fed as input to the compression circuit designed on the proposed compression circuit implemented on PCB using
PCB. As the threshold voltage (δ) is increased, more number discrete components. Intuitively we can see from Fig. 11 that a
of pixels are integrated and thus, skipped, which results in an threshold of 3.8 V provides a trade-off between the amount of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



530 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 31, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021

Fig. 12. Compressed images obtained from circuit implementation of the
proposed compressive acquisition for (a) δ = 3 V, (b) δ = 3.4 V, (c) δ = 3.8 V,
(d) δ = 4.2 V.

Fig. 13. Images reconstructed using NNI for (a) δ = 3 V, (b) δ = Fig. 16. Images reconstructed using NNI.
3.4 V,

(c) δ = 3.8 V, (d) δ = 4.2 V.

Fig. 14. Images used for experimental evaluation of the proposed method.

Fig. 17. Images obtained after CNN for the images shown in Fig. 16.

Fig. 15. Compressed images obtained after compressive acquisition for a Fig. 18. PSNR and amount of compression obtained after reconstruction for
threshold of 3.8 V. a threshold (δ) of 3.8 V.

compression and reconstruction quality. Accordingly, 3.8 V in Fig. 16 and Fig. 17, respectively. The PSNR and amount
threshold value is used for all the considered images. The of compression obtained after image reconstruction (R1 - R6
compressed images obtained using the designed circuit are and Z1 - Z6) are shown in Fig. 18.
shown in Fig. 15 (C1 - C6). The images reconstructed using Although thermal imaging is not the focus of this paper,
NNI and their corresponding outputs from the CNN are shown the proposed technique is empirically found to be useful for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



KAUR et al.: ON-ARRAY COMPRESSIVE ACQUISITION IN CIS USING ACCUMULATED SPATIAL GRADIENTS 531

Fig. 19. (a) Test image of resolution 4096 × 4096 pixels used in the experiment to understand the effect of resolution on reconstruction quality.
(b) Corresponding compressed image obtained using the proposed method (c) Reconstructed image obtained using NNI.

compressive acquisition of these images. Thermal imaging
relies on heat signatures of different objects and can produce
contrast depending on the temperature difference between the
objects in a given scene. In general individual objects, which
can be considered as thermodynamic systems, try to attain
thermal equilibrium. As a result, spatial gradients observed
in the image, (S6, Fig. 14), are of low magnitude, therefore,
the proposed method achieves high compression while PSNR
of the reconstructed images is comparable to R2-Z2. It is
particularly useful in applications such as surveillance where

Fig. 20. Variation in achieved compression and reconstructed image quality
a continuous stream of images are recorded. Thermal imaging (measured using PSNR).
is affected by factors such as air temperature, humidity, reflec-
tively of different objects etc. However, environmental factors
like humidity uniformly affect all the pixel data, therefore, the image sensor. Another limiting factor is the process of
are not expected to affect the performance of the proposed compression and reconstruction, and to analyze its impact a
method. test image of size 4096 × 4096 pixels, shown in Fig. 19(a),

As shown in Fig. 18, CNN results in the reduction of PSNR is considered. The corresponding compressed image obtained
up to 2 dB, which shows the limitation of deep learning. CNN using the proposed technique is shown in Fig. 19(b). The
is trained using the compressed images obtained by MATLAB image is reconstructed using NNI and shown in Fig. 19(c).
simulation which assumes ideal environment and neglects all The test image (Fig. 19(a)) is downsampled to various different
the noise components. In contrast the images, C1 - C6, are resolutions and the process of compression-reconstruction is
affected by the circuit noise, therefore, unlike the simulated applied on each downsampled version. Quality of the recon-
images, Table I, CNN is unable to enhance the reconstructed structed images is measured using PSNR and the variation
images R1 - R6. A CNN trained on the images obtained by the is plotted in Fig. 20 along with the observed compression.
designed circuit can enhance the performance which would be As can be seen the proposed method results in relatively lower
considered in future. quality output for resolutions smaller than 1024×1024 pixels,

An important observation of the experiment is the per- which shows an approximate lower limit of resolution or
formance of the proposed technique on thermal image. The threshold. The measured PSNR value as well as the amount
thermal image is compressed more as compared to the other of compression achieved increases with resolution. This is due
considered images and also reconstructed with comparatively to the fact that at high resolution, the information content of a
better quality, mainly due to low spatial variation. Thus, single pixel is reduced, therefore, a reasonable reconstruction
the thermal imaging is a comparatively more adequate modal- quality is achieved even with large number of discarded pixels
ity for the proposed method. or high compression.

V. DISCUSSIONS VI. CONCLUSION

The proposed compression technique is an on-array A compressive acquisition technique is presented in this
compressive acquisition technique where the most salient paper. Spatial gradients between pixels are accumulated over
characteristic is low-complex hardware design. Thus, the res- the number of cycles and compared with a reference thresh-
olution limitation mainly comes from the pixel array size of old. The pixels are skipped according to the threshold and,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



532 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 31, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021

therefore, readout power is saved. The discarded pixels are [15] A. Kaur, D. Mishra, S. Jain, and M. Sarkar, “Content driven on-chip
reconstructed using nearest neighbour interpolation. The simu- compression and time efficient reconstruction for image sensor applica-

tions,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 18, no. 22, pp. 9169–9179, Nov. 2018.
lations of the proposed method are performed in MATLAB and [16] Q. Dai, H. Chopp, E. Pouyet, O. Cossairt, M. Walton, and A. Katsagge-
Cadence with UMC 180 nm CMOS process for comparison. los, “Adaptive image sampling using deep learning and its application
In addition, functionality of the compression technique is on X-ray fluorescence image reconstruction,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,

early access, Dec. 9, 2019, doi: 10.1109/TMM.2019.2958760.
proved using the circuit designed with discrete components [17] A. Taimori and F. Marvasti, “Adaptive sparse image sampling and
which shows suitability of the proposed method for on-array recovery,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Imag., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 311–325,
compression in CMOS image sensors. Sep. 2018.

[18] L. Zhong, S. Wan, and L. Xie, “Adaptive sampling for image compressed
sensing based on deep learning,” in Proc. J. Phys., Conf., vol. 1229,

REFERENCES May 2019, Art. no. 012016.
[19] M. Soumekh, “Multiresolution dynamic image representation with uni-

[1] D. G. Chen, F. Tang, and A. Bermak, “A low-power pilot-DAC based form and foveal spiral scan data,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 7,
column parallel 8b SAR ADC with forward error correction for CMOS no. 11, pp. 1627–1635, Nov. 1998.
image sensors,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 10, [20] R. Sibson, “A brief description of natural neighbour interpolation,” in
pp. 2572–2583, Oct. 2013. Interpreting Multivariate Data, V. Barnett, Ed. New York, NY, USA:

[2] K. Kitamura et al., “A 33-megapixel 120-Frames-Per-Second 2.5-watt Wiley, 1981.
CMOS image sensor with column-parallel two-stage cyclic Analog- [21] J. Seiler, M. Jonscher, M. Schoberl, and A. Kaup, “Resampling images
to-Digital converters,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 59, no. 12, to a regular grid from a non-regular subset of pixel positions using
pp. 3426–3433, Dec. 2012. frequency selective reconstruction,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 24,

[3] A. Kaur, D. Mishra, and M. Sarkar, “A 12-bit, 2.5-bit/Phase column- no. 11, pp. 4540–4555, Nov. 2015.
parallel cyclic ADC,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., [22] N. Ansari and A. Gupta, “Image reconstruction using matched wavelet
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 248–252, Jan. 2019. estimated from data sensed compressively using partial canonical iden-

[4] T. Arai et al., “6.9 A 1.1μm 33Mpixel 240fps 3D-stacked CMOS image tity matrix,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 3680–3695,
sensor with 3-stage cyclic-based analog-to-digital converters,” in IEEE Aug. 2017.
ISSCC Dig. Tech. Papers, Jan. 2016, pp. 126–128. [23] D. Mishra, S. Chaudhury, M. Sarkar, and A. S. Soin, “Ultrasound image

[5] A. Kaur and M. Sarkar, “A low power low latency comparator for enhancement using structure oriented adversarial network,” IEEE Signal
ramp ADC in CMOS imagers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. Process. Lett., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1349–1353, Sep. 2018.
(ISCAS), May 2016, pp. 1466–1469. [24] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,

[6] F. Tang, B. Wang, A. Bermak, X. Zhou, S. Hu, and X. He, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
“A column-parallel inverter-based cyclic ADC for CMOS image sensor [25] D. Mishra, S. Chaudhury, M. Sarkar, and A. S. Soin, “Ultrasound
with capacitance and clock scaling,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, image segmentation: A deeply supervised network with attention to
vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 162–167, Jan. 2016. boundaries,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 1637–1648,

[7] J.-F. Lin, S.-J. Chang, C.-F. Chiu, H.-H. Tsai, and J.-J. Wang, “Low- Jun. 2019.
power and wide-bandwidth cyclic ADC with capacitor and opamp reuse [26] Y. Oike and A. El Gamal, “CMOS image sensor with per-column
techniques for CMOS image sensor application,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 9,  ADC and programmable compressed sensing,” IEEE J. Solid-State
no. 12, pp. 2044–2054, Dec. 2009. Circuits, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 318–328, Jan. 2013.

[8] M. Zhang and A. Bermak, “CMOS image sensor with on-chip image [27] J.-H. Park, S. Aoyama, T. Watanabe, K. Isobe, and S. Kawahito, “A high-
compression: A review and performance analysis,” J. Sensors, vol. 2010, speed low-noise CMOS image sensor with 13-b column-parallel single-
Dec. 2010, Art. no. 920693. ended cyclic ADCs,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 56, no. 11,

[9] W. D. Leon-Salas, S. Balkir, K. Sayood, N. Schemm, and M. W. Hoff- pp. 2414–2422, Nov. 2009.
man, “A CMOS imager with focal plane compression using predictive [28] H. Yu, W. Tang, M. Guo, and S. Chen, “A two-step prediction
coding,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 2555–2572, ADC architecture for integrated low power image sensors,” IEEE
Nov. 2007. Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 50–60,

[10] A. Nilchi, J. Aziz, and R. Genov, “Focal-plane algorithmically- Jan. 2017.
multiplying CMOS computational image sensor,” IEEE J. Solid-State [29] H. Zhu, M. Zhang, Y. Suo, T. D. Tran, and J. Van der Spiegel, “Design of
Circuits, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 1829–1839, Jun. 2009. a digital address-event triggered compressive acquisition image sensor,”

[11] Y. Nishikawa, S. Kawahito, M. Furuta, and T. Tamura, “A high-speed IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 191–199,
CMOS image sensor with on-chip parallel image compression circuits,” Feb. 2016.
in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf., Sep. 2007, pp. 833–836. [30] X. Zhong, B. Zhang, A. Bermak, C.-Y. Tsui, and M.-K. Law, “A low-

[12] J. Y. F. Hsieh, A. van der Avoird, P. Kleihorst, and T. H. Y. Meng, power compression-based CMOS image sensor with microshift-guided
“Transpose memory for video rate JPEG compression on highly parallel SAR ADC,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 65, no. 10,
single-chip digital CMOS imager,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Process., pp. 1350–1354, Oct. 2018.
vol. 3, Sep. 2000, pp. 102–105. [31] S. Kawahito et al., “A CMOS image sensor with analog two-dimensional

[13] M. Yue, D. Wu, and Z. Wang, “Data compression for image sensor DCT-based compression circuits for one-chip cameras,” IEEE J. Solid-
arrays using a 15-bit two-step Sigma–Delta ADC,” IEEE Sensors J., State Circuits, vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2030–2041, Dec. 1997.
vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 2989–2998, Sep. 2014. [32] S. Hwang, J. Park, N. Kim, Y. Choi, and I. S. Kweon, “Multi-

[14] D. Mishra, A. Kaur, and M. Sarkar, “A super-pixel based on-chip image spectral pedestrian detection: Benchmark dataset and baseline,” in
compression for high speed CMOS image sensors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015,
Electron Devices Solid-State Circuits (EDSSC), Oct. 2017, pp. 1–2. pp. 1037–1045.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur. Downloaded on March 09,2026 at 14:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.



1

Effect of The Latent Structure on Clustering with
GANs

Deepak Mishra, Aravind Jayendran and Prathosh A. P.

Abstract—Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have 3) Propose a method for the construction of a learnable
shown remarkable success in generation of data from natural multi-modal latent space that facilitates sparsely super-
data manifolds such as images. In several scenarios, it is desirable vised learning of the cluster priors.
that generated data is well-clustered, especially when there is
severe class imbalance. In this paper, we focus on the problem of
clustering in generated space of GANs and uncover its relation- B. Problem setting
ship with the characteristics of the latent space. We derive from
first principles, the necessary and sufficient conditions needed to In the context of GANs, clustering in generated space refers
achieve faithful clustering in the GAN framework: (i) presence of to inheritance of the cluster properties of real data on the
a multimodal latent space with adjustable priors, (ii) existence generated data. In GANs, a generator g, which is a function
of a latent space inversion mechanism and (iii) imposition of of the latent variable (z), is tasked to sample from the desired
the desired cluster priors on the latent space. We also identify
the GAN models in the literature that partially satisfy these data (x) distribution via an adversarial game [11]. Suppose
conditions and demonstrate the importance of all the components PX and PW , respectively be the distributions of the generated
required, through ablative studies on multiple real world image and real data, with X and W representing their support. We
datasets. Additionally, we describe a procedure to construct a call a distribution clustered (or equivalently multi-modal) if its
multimodal latent space which facilitates learning of cluster support is a disconnected union of non-empty pairwise-disjoint
priors with sparse supervision. The code for the implementation
can be found at https://github.com/NEMGAN/NEMGAN-P connected open subsets. For instance, PW is a clustered

(distribution with M clusters if W is a disconnected union
of M non-empty pairwise)disjoint conn⋃ected open subsets
Wi, i ∈ {0, 1, ...,M − 1} and W ≡ M−1

I. INTRODUCTION i=0 Wi, with Wi

denoting the support of the ith mode 1. With this definition,
A. Background and Contributions clustering in generated space amounts to the following: if PW

Generative Adversarial Networks(GANs) [11], [1], [23], is clustered in the aforementioned way, PX is also clustered
[4], [22] and its variants are a category of highly successful in the exact same way. That is, the probability masses of PW
generative neural models which learn mappings from arbitrary and PX over each individual cluster (or mode) are the same.
latent distributions to highly complex real-world distributions.
In several downstream tasks such as conditional generation, II. CLUSTERING IN GANS - REQUIREMENTS
data augmentation and class balancing [14], [3], [25], [17], Firstly, we show that to obtain a clustered generated space
[6], it is desirable that the data generated by a generative or equivalently, a multimodal PX , it is necessary to have a
model is clustered. However, it is well known that GANs in multimodal latent space PZ with a structure similar to the
their raw formulation are unable to fully impose all the cluster real-data.
properties of the real-data on to the generated data [2], [29], Lemm⋂a 1: Let Z denote the support of PZ .
[15], [4], especially when the real-data has skewed clusters. ⋂If Zi ⊆ Z

denote the inverse images of Xi under g, then iXi = Φ
While a lot of efforts have been devoted in past to stabilize the only if i Zi = Φ, where Φ is an empty set.
GAN training [26], [12], [15], little attention has been given Proof: Without the loss of generality we assume M = 2.
to understand the impact of latent space characteristics on data Assume X0 ∩X1 = Φ and Z0 ∩Z1 6= Φ =⇒ ∃zi ∈ Z0 ∩Z1.
generation (a brief review of related methods is given in Sec. Given zi ∈ Z0, let g(zi) = xi0 ∈ X0 and similarly, given
4). Motivated by these observations, we propose to accomplish zi ∈ Z1, g(zi) = xi1 ∈ X1. Since g is a continuous function,
the following: xi0 = xi1 = xi =⇒ xi ∈ X0∩X1 contradicting the fact that

1) Starting from the first principles, formulate the necessary X0 ∩ X1 = Φ, hence Z0 ∩ Z1 = Φ.
and sufficient conditions needed for faithful clustering in Even though a multimodal latent space is a necessary
the generated space of GAN. condition (Lemma 1), it is not sufficient. The generating

2) Demonstrate the importance of each of the condition function g can be non-injective, implying that multiple modes
through ablative studies using different GAN models that of the latent space can collapse to a single mode in the
partially satisfy them, on four large-scale datasets. generated space. However, if there exists another continuous

mapping h : X→ Ŷ which maps the generated samples x, to
Deepak is with IIT Jodhpur, Aravind is with Flipkart Internet Pvt Ltd

and Prathosh is with IIT Delhi, India. (e-mail: dmishra@iitj.ac.in, ar- 1For simplicity, we have assumed that the clusters do not overlap albeit all
avind.j@flipkart.com, and prathoshap@gmail.com.) the analysis can be extended to the case where clusters have minimal overlap.

arXiv:2005.02435v1  [cs.LG]  5 May 2020



2

another auxiliary random variable ŷ such that PŶ is also multi- taking an additive mixture of a generalized discrete distribution
modal, then Lemma 1 can be applied again on h to guarantee and a compact-support continuous distribution such as uniform
multimodality on PX , as stated in the following corollary to distribution. Let y ∼ PY and ν2 ∼ PN2 denote samples drawn
Lemma 1.

Corollary⋂1⋂.1. Let h : X →⋂ Ŷ and Ŷi ⊆ Ŷ b⋂ from the discrete and continuous distributions, respectively.
e a subset Accordingly, the latent space z is obtained as: z = y + ν2.

of Ŷ. Then i Ŷi = Φ only if i Xi = Φ⋂. Given i Zi = Φ, This results in a multi-modal continuous distribution with
the condition i Ŷi = Φ is sufficient for i Xi = Φ. disconnected modes since PZ = PY ∗ PN , where ∗ denotes

2

Corollary 1.1 states that if the latent distribution (PZ) is the convolution product. The support of PN2 is chosen in such
multimodal with M modes and h maps x to any multimodal a way that the modes of PZ are disjoint. In PZ , the number and
distribution (PŶ ) with M modes, the generated distribution, the mass of the modes are obtained from discrete component
PX , will also have M modes. Even though in principle, (PY ) and the continuous component (PN ) ensures variability.

2

it is sufficient that if PŶ is any M modal distribution to The discrete ∫component y ∼ PY can also be interpreted as an
achieve clustering in PX , the clusters may not be optimal as indicator of the modes of z. Formally, y := i ∀z ∈ Zi, which
ascertained in the following corollary. implies that Z PZ dz = PY (y = i).

i

Corollary 1.2. Suppose g is the generator network of a Note that in all the aforementioned latent space construction
GAN which maps PZ to PX and h is an inverter network strategies, the latent space parameters are fixed and cannot
which maps PX to PŶ . Further, let us assume all the distri- be changed or learned to suit the real-data distribution. To
butions, PZ , PX and PŶ , along with the real data distribution alleviate this problem, we propose to reparameterize a second
PW are multimodal with M modes having disjoint supports. continuous uniform distribution, PN , using a vector α to

1

The cluster properties of the real data W will not be reflected construct the desired PY . Let α = [α0, α1, ....., αM−1]T ,
in the generated data X, if the probability mass under every αi ∈ R be an arbitrary vector and ν1 ∼ PN (ν1) = U[0, 1]. We

1

mode (cluster) in PZ does not match with the modal masses define a function, f (α, ν1) : RM×R→ RM reparameterizing
of PW (Proof in the Supplementary material). PY as follows.

Thus, if either PZ or PŶ are chosen such that their mode {
(cluster) masses do not match with that of real data distribution σh (ai − ν1)− σh (ai−1 − ν1) ; i 6= 0

fi (αi, ν1) = (1)
PW , the adversarial game played in the GAN objective cannot σh (ai − ν1) ; i = 0
force PX to follow PW . In other words, cluster properties of
the real data W will not be reflected in the generated data X wherefi is the ith element of f , σh is a unit step function and

ai is given as
leading to incorrect coverage of the clusters in the generated

ai = ∑ ∑i
data as observed in [16]. In summary, the following are the 1

eαi (2)
necessary and sufficient conditions required to accomplish α

k e k
j=0

clustering in the generated space of a GAN.
With these, one can reparametrize a uniform distribution

1) The latent space which is the input to the GAN, should using α and f , to obtain a multinoulli distribution.
be multimodal with number of modes equal to the Lemma 2: Define y =: arg maxi∈{0,..,M−1} fi, then y
number of clusters in the real data (C1). follows a multinoulli distribution P

2) There should be a continuous mapping from the gener- Y with

PY (y = i) = ∑eαiated space to an auxiliary multimodal random variable
with same cluster properties as the real data (C2). k e

αk

3) The mode (cluster) masses of the distributions of the (Proof in the supplementary material).
latent and auxiliary variables must match to the mode Therefore, starting from an arbitrary discrete valued real
masses of the distribution of the real data (C3). vector and sampling from a known uniform distribution, one

can obtain a multinoulli random variable whose parameters
I. CLUSTERING IN GANS - REALIZATION become a function of the chosen arbitrary discrete vector α

In this section, we describe the possible methods for real- which may be fixed according to the real data or learned
izing the requirements for clustering with GANs. through some inductive bias.

A. Multimodal Latent space B. Latent inverter
Two known ways of constructing a multimodal latent space 1) Clustering: As mentioned in the previous sections, it is

are 1) using the mixture of continuous distributions such as necessary to have a mapping from the generated data space
GMM [13], 2) using the mixture of a discrete and a continuous to an auxiliary random variable that would have same mode
distribution [5], [24]. Latter one is more popular and often masses as the real data. This can be ensured by choosing
realized by concatenation of discrete and continuous random h(x) = ŷ (a neural network) that would minimize a divergence
variables. We describe a more general form of this by using an measure, D(PŶ , PY ), such as KL-divergence, between the
additive mixture of a pair of discrete and continuous random distribution of its output ŷ and the distribution of the discrete
variables, which facilitates flexible mode priors. part of the latent space (y). Learning an h this way, would

Let the latent space be represented by Z and PZ denote not only lead to clustered generation, but also ensures that the
its distribution with M modes. This could be obtained by modal (cluster) properties of the latent space (and thus real



3

data) is reflected in the generated space as described in the However, since we have shown that with incorrect priors,
following lemma: GANs cannot cluster faithfully, the priors can be first learned,

Lemm∫ a 3: Let x̂ be a discrete random variable that is if unknown, and GANs can be trained with the correct priors.
an indicator of clusters (modes) of PX . That is, PX̂(x̂ =
i) = X PX dx. Then minimization of KL divergence, IV. GAN MODELS

i
DKL(PŶ ||PY ), leads to minimization of DKL(PŶ ||PX̂). In this section, we identify the GAN models that satisfy at-
(Proof given in the supplementary material). least one of the three conditions required for clustering. Vanilla

Note that h(x) or ŷ acts like a posterior of the cluster GANs such as DCGAN [25], WGAN [1], SNGAN [23] etc.
assignment conditioned on the generated data. Therefore if the satisfy none of the three conditions. Models such as DeliGAN
parameters of the input latent distribution (αi’s) are chosen [13], GANMM [30], MADGAN [10] constructs a multimodal
in accordance with the modal properties of the real data latent space using mixture models to avoid mode-collapse,
distribution, generated data space will be well-clustered within nevertheless they neither have a latent inverter (C2) nor mode-
a standard GAN training regime. If g is the Generator of a matching (C3). Latent inverter network (with different choices
GAN with d denoting the usual discriminator network and h for d) has been incorporated in the context of regularizing
is a neural network operating on the output of the generator to GAN training in many models such as VEEGAN [28], BiGAN
produce ŷ, the objective function to be optimized for faithful [7], ALI [8], CATGAN [27] etc. While all of these have
clustering is given by: latent inverter with different objectives, they lack multimodal

min maxL (g, h, d) (3) latent space (C1) and prior-matching (C3). InfoGAN [5] and
g,h d ClusterGAN [24] have both multimodal latent space and latent

inverter (with a mutual information maximization cost for d)
L (g, h, d) = Ew[log d(w)] + Ez[log (1− d ◦ g(z))] but not the mode-matching (C3).

+D(PŶ , PY ) (4) In the subsequent sections, we consider a representative
model from all categories to demonstrate the role of all

where w represents samples from the real data distribution. For the conditions via ablations. In a model, a satisfied and an
implementation, cross-entropy for the KL-term in equation 4 unsatisfied condition is respectively denoted with C
is used, since the entropy of P i and Ĉi.

Y is a constant for a given For this study, we consider WGAN for Ĉ
dataset. A block diagram representing the learning pipeline is 1Ĉ2Ĉ3, DeliGAN for

C
given in the Supplementary material (Fig. 2). 1Ĉ2Ĉ3, ALI/BiGAN for Ĉ1C2Ĉ3, InfoGAN/ClusterGAN

for C
4) Learning cluster priors: The presence of the inverter 1C2Ĉ3, and finally build a model (with WGAN as

the base) with the described multimodal latent space, latent
network provides an additional advantage. It helps in learning inverter (with KL-divergence for h) and matched prior for
the true mode (cluster) priors in presence of a favourable

C
inductive bias [21]. In our formulation, information about the 1C2C3. For all the experiments, the class prior is fixed

either to uniform (for Ĉ
mode-priors is parameterized through the vector 3) or matched to the appropriate

α. Let there mode/cluster prior (for C
be a set of few labelled real data samples, call it W 3), which provides the required

s, which inductive bias. The underlying architecture and the training
provides the required inductive bias. As observed previously, procedures are kept the same across all models. All GANs are
the network h(x) is an estimator of the posterior of the cluster trained using the architectures and procedures described in the
assignments given the data, P (ŷ|x). Thus, marginalizing the respective papers.
output of h(x) over all x amounts to computing Ex[h(x)],
which provides an estimate of PŶ . Analogous to Ex[h(x)],
the quantity ∑eαi V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

α provides an estimate of P
k Y (Lemma 2).

k e
If the assumed α is incorrect, then h would mis-assign cluster A. Datasets and metrics
labels on some of Ws. In other words, PY and PŶ aren’t the We consider four image datasets namely, MNIST [19],
same which would be the same if the priors were correct. In FMNIST, CelebA [20], and CIFAR-10 [18] for experiments
this scenario, we propose to retrain h(x) on Ws using a cross- (qualitative illustration on a synthetic dataset is provided in the
entropy loss so that it assigns correct cluster labels on all of supplementary material, Fig. 1). Since the objective of all the
Ws. Subsequently, we re-estimate Ex[h(x)] for an arbitrary experiments is to obtain a well-clustered generation with class
subset of unlabelled data (typically less than 1%), with the imbalance, we create imbalanced datasets from the standard
new h(x). Now since h(x) is changed (via retraining), one datasets by either sub-sampling or merging multiple classes.
can use the mismatch between Ex[h(x)] and ∑eαi

α to re- Specifically, we consider the following data - (i) take two sets
k

k e
compute α. of two distinct MNIST classes, 0 Vs 4 (minimal overlap under

The following is the loss function used that incorporates the t-SNE) and 3 Vs 5 (maximum overlap under t-SNE), with
aforementioned idea for learni∣n∣g α: two different skews of 70:30 and 90:10, (ii) merge together

‘similar’ clusters {{3,5,8}, {2}, {1,4,7,9}, {6}, {0}} to form a
minLα = minLcc + min ∣∣Ex[h(x)]− ∑eαi ∣∣∣∣ (5) 5-class MNIST dataset (MNIST-5). Similarly, we also grouped
h,α h α 1

k e
αk

FMNIST classes to create the FMNIST-5 dataset as {{Sandal,
where Lcc is the cross-entropy loss used to train h on Ws. Sneaker, Ankle Boot}, {Bag}, {Tshirt/Top, Dress}, {Pullover,
Note that prior-learning component is optional and indepen- Coat, Shirt}, {Trouser}}, (iii) we consider CelebA dataset to
dent of the GAN training which is completely unsupervised. distinguish celebrities with black hair from the rest. (iv) two



4

TABLE I: Quantitative evaluation on imbalanced data for TABLE II: Evaluation of the proposed method on colour
generation with clustering. Lower performances are observed datasets, CIFAR (Frogs Vs. Planes), CelebA (black hair Vs.
with GANs where one of three conditions is violated. non-black hair). It is seen that GANs that violate any of three

Dataset Model ACC NMI ARI FID required conditions offer lower performance.
Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.64 0.06 0.08 19.76 Dataset Model ACC NMI ARI FID
C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.66 0.13 0.11 10.14 Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.66 0.41 0.46 55.54

MNIST-2 Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.75 0.20 0.25 15.11 C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.70 0.51 0.54 42.87
(70:30) C1C2Ĉ3 0.81 0.40 0.38 4.63 CIFAR-2 Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.75 0.60 0.63 47.35

C1C2C3 0.98 0.89 0.93 1.33 (70:30) C1C2Ĉ3 0.72 0.68 0.65 44.38
Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.64 0.09 0.07 20.32 C1C2C3 0.88 0.70 0.75 31.15
C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.59 0.15 0.13 11.45 Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.50 0.19 0.17 58.45

MNIST-2 Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.61 0.24 0.25 10.84 C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.54 0.18 0.29 43.87
(90:10) C1C2Ĉ3 0.77 0.33 0.54 6.08 CIFAR-2 Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.63 0.26 0.39 48.16

C1C2C3 0.98 0.86 0.91 1.66 (90:10) C1C2Ĉ3 0.67 0.22 0.21 42.01
Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.51 0.21 0.19 20.64 C1C2C3 0.83 0.26 0.28 32.86
C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.71 0.55 0.52 12.07 Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.55 0.02 0.01 150.2

MNIST-5 Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.76 0.59 0.64 15.31 C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.58 0.15 0.14 110.9
C1C2Ĉ3 0.74 0.65 0.71 4.92 CelebA Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.57 0.14 0.23 83.56
C1C2C3 0.96 0.89 0.89 1.13 C1C2Ĉ3 0.64 0.18 0.26 67.1
Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.62 0.30 0.30 10.46 C1C2C3 0.81 0.30 0.38 62.9
C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.77 0.66 0.61 5.41

FMNIST-5 Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.75 0.68 0.65 9.20 the mode priors are matched by default in both the cases and
C1C2Ĉ3 0.81 0.72 0.74 4.42
C1C2C3 0.92 0.81 0.81 0.69 the dataset has uniform priors. All these experiments suggests

for a GAN model to generated well-clustered data, it should
be equipped with all the stated conditions.

classes of CIFAR (Frog Vs Planes, selected arbitrarily) with
two synthetic imbalances of 70:30 and 90:10. C. Results for Prior learning

We use Accuracy (ACC), Adjusted Rand Index (ARI)
and Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) [9] as metrics As mentioned in Section III.A, the proposed method of
to measure the clustering performance and Frechet Inception latent construction with latent inverter could be used to learn
Distance (FID) [23] to measure the quality of the generated the class-priors (if unknown) with sparse supervision (note
images. While the first three have to be higher, FID that that the clustering experiments are completely independent
quantifies the relative image quality of different models, have of prior-learning where the priors were assumed to be either
to be lower. uniform or known a-priori). To evaluate the performance of

the proposed prior learning method, we consider the same
B. Results and Discussions setup as in the previous section, with imbalanced class priors.

We initialize α uniformly with same value for each of its
Results on MNIST-2 (3 Vs 5), MNIST-5 and FMNIST-5 element. Priors are learned with the technique described in

are shown in Table I. It is observed that the GAN with all Section III.B.2 using 1% of the labelled data. The learned
conditions satisfied (proposed) consistently outperforms the priors are compared with real data priors in Table III. It is
models that only satisfy the conditions partially, both in terms seen that the proposed technique learns class priors accurately
of cluster-purity and generation-quality. Similar observations for all the cases considered.
are made on the colour datsets, CIFAR and CelebA as sum-
merized in Table II. It is also seen that, the presence of the TABLE III: Evaluation of the proposed prior learning method.
multimodal latent space (C1) and a latent inverter (C2) seem to Dataset Real data priors Learned priors
affect the performance the most when there is class imbalance. MNIST-2 [0.7, 0.3] [0.709, 0.291]
This is corroborated by the fact that the performance of the MNIST-2 [0.9, 0.1] [0.891, 0.109]
C1C2Ĉ3 model (ClusterGAN) is consistently best amongst all MNIST-5 [0.3, 0.1, 0.4, [0.291, 0.095, 0.419,

0.1, 0.1] 0.095, 0.099]
the models that partially satisfy the conditions. This implies FMNIST-5 [0.3, 0.1, 0.3, [0.304, 0.096, 0.284,
that knowing the class-priors is an important pre-requisite to 0.2, 0.1] 0.220, 0.096]
obtain a faithful clustered generation in GANs. CIFAR-2 [0.7, 0.3] [0.679, 0.321]

CIFAR-2 [0.9, 0.1] [0.876, 0.124]
Another important observation in CelebA experiment is that, CelebA-2 [0.239, 0.761] [0.272, 0.727]

different attributes e.g. eyeglasses, mustache etc., can divide
the data into two clusters of different sizes. However, only
black hair attribute divides the data into clusters of sizes 23.9% VI. CONCLUSION

and 76.1% and by fixing the latent mode priors to 0.239 In this work, we described the problem of clustering in the
and 0.761, our model automatically discovers the black hair generated space of GANs and investigated the role of latent
attribute and generates data accordingly. Finally, it is observed space characteristics in obtaining the desired clustering. We
that the performance of the C1C2Ĉ3 and C1C2C3 are almost showed, this can be achieved by having a multimodal latent
the same when the dataset is balanced (quantitative results in space along with a latent space inversion network and matched
the supplementary material, Table IV). This is expected since priors of latent and real data distribution. We also proposed to



5

parameterize the latent space such that its characteristics can [20] Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning
be learned. It also leads to the development of a technique face attributes in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE International

for learning the unknown real data class-priors using sparse Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3730–3738, 2015.
[21] Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard

supervision. Our analysis results in a GAN model which Schölkopf, and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in
offers the advantages of robust generation under the setting of the unsupervised learning of disentangled representations. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1811.12359, 2018.
skewed data distributions and clustering, where the existing [22] Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond YK Lau, Zhen Wang, and
methods showed sub-optimal performances. To the best of Stephen Paul Smolley. Least squares generative adversarial networks. In
our knowledge, this is the first work that demonstrates the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,

pages 2794–2802, 2017.
importance of latent structure on the ability of GANs to [23] Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida.
generate well-clustered data. Spectral normalization for generative adversarial networks. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1802.05957, 2018.
[24] Sudipto Mukherjee, Himanshu Asnani, Eugene Lin, and Sreeram Kan-

REFERENCES nan. ClusterGAN: Latent space clustering in generative adversarial
[1] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein gen- networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.03627, 2018.

[25] Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised
erative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Machine representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial
Learning, pages 214–223, 2017.

[2] Sanjeev Arora and Yi Zhang. Do GANs actually learn the distribution? networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
[26] Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec

an empirical study. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08224, 2017.
[3] Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation Radford, and Xi Chen. Improved techniques for training GANs. In

learning: A review and new perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2234–2242,
analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828, 2013. 2016.

[4] Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale [27] Jost Tobias Springenberg. Unsupervised and semi-supervised learn-
GAN training for high fidelity natural image synthesis. arXiv preprint ing with categorical generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.11096, 2018. arXiv:1511.06390, 2015.

[5] Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, [28] Akash Srivastava, Lazar Valkoz, Chris Russell, Michael U Gutmann,
and Pieter Abbeel. InfoGAN: Interpretable representation learning by and Charles Sutton. VEEGAN: Reducing mode collapse in GANs
information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In Advances in using implicit variational learning. In Advances in Neural Information
neural information processing systems, pages 2172–2180, 2016. Processing Systems, pages 3308–3318, 2017.

[6] Brian Cheung, Jesse A Livezey, Arjun K Bansal, and Bruno A Ol- [29] Huikai Wu, Shuai Zheng, Junge Zhang, and Kaiqi Huang. GP-
shausen. Discovering hidden factors of variation in deep networks. arXiv GAN: Towards realistic high-resolution image blending. arXiv preprint
preprint arXiv:1412.6583, 2014. arXiv:1703.07195, 2017.

[7] Jeff Donahue, Philipp Krähenbühl, and Trevor Darrell. Adversarial [30] Yang Yu and Wen-Ji Zhou. Mixture of GANs for clustering. In IJCAI,
feature learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09782, 2016. pages 3047–3053, 2018.

[8] Vincent Dumoulin, Ishmael Belghazi, Ben Poole, Olivier Mastropietro,
Alex Lamb, Martin Arjovsky, and Aaron Courville. Adversarially
learned inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00704, 2016.

[9] Adil Fahad, Najlaa Alshatri, Zahir Tari, Abdullah Alamri, Ibrahim
Khalil, Albert Y Zomaya, Sebti Foufou, and Abdelaziz Bouras. A survey
of clustering algorithms for big data: Taxonomy and empirical analysis.
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, 2(3):267–279,
2014.

[10] Arnab Ghosh, Viveka Kulharia, Vinay P Namboodiri, Philip HS Torr,
and Puneet K Dokania. Multi-agent diverse generative adversarial
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 8513–8521, 2018.

[11] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David
Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Gen-
erative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 2672–2680, 2014.

[12] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin,
and Aaron C Courville. Improved training of wasserstein GANs. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 5767–5777,
2017.

[13] Swaminathan Gurumurthy, Ravi Kiran Sarvadevabhatla, and R
Venkatesh Babu. DeliGAN: Generative adversarial networks for diverse
and limited data. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 166–174, 2017.

[14] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. Unsupervised
learning. In The elements of statistical learning, pages 485–585.
Springer, 2009.

[15] Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive
growing of GANs for improved quality, stability, and variation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.10196, 2017.

[16] Mahyar Khayatkhoei, Maneesh K Singh, and Ahmed Elgammal. Dis-
connected manifold learning for generative adversarial networks. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 7343–7353,
2018.

[17] Diederik P Kingma, Shakir Mohamed, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and
Max Welling. Semi-supervised learning with deep generative models.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 3581–
3589, 2014.

[18] Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of
features from tiny images. Technical report, Citeseer, 2009.

[19] Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and CJ Burges. Mnist handwritten
digit database. AT&T Labs [Online]. Available: http://yann. lecun.
com/exdb/mnist, 2, 2010.



6

(a) Real data (b) WGAN (c) DeliGAN (d) InfoGAN (e) ClusterGAN (f) Ours

Fig. 1: Clustering in the generated spaces produced by different GANs for two-class Moon-data with cluster size ratio of
80:20. In absence of multimodal latent space, latent inverter and prior matching (WGAN), entire data is confined to a single
cluster (Impossible conditional generation). Fulfilment of only one of the three requirements, e.g. only multimodal latent space
(DeliGAN) can generate two classes but misses one of the clusters completely. Similarly the presence of multimodal latent
space and latent space inverter (InfoGAN and ClusterGAN) are also unable to provide desired clustering in absence of matched
priors. Our method satisfies all three conditions and thus can faithfully cluster.

PY (y = i) = ∫PN1(ai−1 ≤ ν1 ≤ ai) (9)
ai eαi

= PN (ν)dν = a −
1. i ai−1 = ∑ (10)

αk
ai−1 k e

Proof for Lemma∑3:
P

DKL(PŶ ||PY ) = ∑PŶ log Ŷ s.t. i ∈ {0, 1} (11)
PY

ŷ=i ( )
= (PŶ logPŶ − PŶ logP∫Y )(12)

∑ŷ=i
= PŶ logPŶ − PŶ log PZ dz

Fig. 2: Illustration of the proposed pipeline for clustering. Gen- ŷ=i Zi

erator g(z) tries to mimic the real data distribution PX with the ∫ ∫ (13)
help of discriminator d. The inversion network h(g(z)) inverts Since Z PZ dz = X x

i ∑X P( d , equation 12 can∫ be written)as
the generation process to ensure the matching of clustering i

properties of generating and latent distributions. Mode priors DKL(PŶ ||PY ) = PŶ logPŶ − PŶ log PX dx
of the latent space is encoded in y by reparameterizing a ∫ ŷ=i Xi
known distribution PN1(ν1) using a learnable vector α. (14)

Since X PX dx = PX̂(x̂ = i), by definition, equation 14 can
i

be written as ∑
VII. A ( )

DDITIONAL PROOFS DKL(PŶ ||PY ) = PŶ logPŶ − PŶ logPX̂ (15)
ŷ=i

Proof for Corollary 1.2: Since both g and h are continuous = DKL(PŶ ||PX̂) (16)
mappings (neural networks) and supports of all the distribu-
tions are dis∫joint, ∫ ∫ VIII. ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

A. D. Mode Separation
PZ dz = PX dx = PŶ dŷ (6)

Z In this work, semantics of the data refer to the modes in data
i Xi Ŷi

distribution. These semantics represent different attributes of
an∫d, ∫ ∫ ∫ the samples and are separated out by the proposed method.

For a better understanding, experiments are conducted with
P samples of only a single digit type from the MNIST dataset.
W dw 6= PZ dz =⇒ PW dw 6= PX dx

Wi Zi Wi Xi Samples of digit 7 and 4 are considered for this purpose.
(7) The proposed GAN (C1C2C3) is trained with a discrete

Proof for Lemma 2: Since σh is a unit step function, f uniform latent space with 10 modes and the generated images
is the first order difference or discrete Dirac delta function are shown in Fig. 3. Each row in Fig. 3 corresponds on
positioned at ai. Now by definition, one latent space mode and shows different attributes of the

considered digits. For example, the fifth row in left pane
PY (y = i) = P (fi 6= 0) (8) contains generated images of digit 7 with slits. Similarly in

right pane, the third row contains images of digit 4 with a
From equation 1, we can see that fi becomes non-zero only closed notch. Note that, even with images of a single digit, no
for ai−1 ≤ ν1 ≤ ai, therefore, mode collapse is observed with the proposed method.



7

TABLE IV: Quantitative evaluation on balanced data for
generation with clustering. Multimodal latent space with latent
inverter offers similar performance as model with all three
conditions satisfied when the data is balanced.

Dataset Model ACC NMI ARI FID
Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.64 0.61 0.49 10.83
C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.89 0.86 0.82 8.74 Fig. 4: Discovery of the facial attribute smile with teeth visible.

MNIST Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.89 0.90 0.84 7.34 Sample images generated in the experiments with class ratio
C1C2Ĉ3 0.95 0.89 0.89 1.84 of 70:30 for faces from the CelebA dataset.
C1C2C3 0.96 0.91 0.92 1.82
Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.34 0.27 0.20 19.80
C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.61 0.59 0.44 12.44

FMNIST Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.55 0.60 0.44 6.95
C1C2Ĉ3 0.63 0.64 0.50 0.56
C1C2C3 0.65 0.70 0.63 0.55
Ĉ1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.24 0.36 0.26 46.80
C1Ĉ2Ĉ3 0.43 0.39 0.46 40.44

CIFAR Ĉ1C2Ĉ3 0.52 0.42 0.48 36.95
C1C2Ĉ3 0.60 0.68 0.69 29.66
C1C2C3 0.67 0.76 0.72 26.35

Fig. 5: Discovery of the attribute facial pose-angle. Sample im-
ages generated in the experiments with class ratio of 10:30:60
for from the CelebA dataset.

Fig. 3: Demonstration of mode separation using the proposed
method. Every row in each figure depicts sample from a mode
when the the proposed method is trained only with a single
digit type with a latent space with ten modes.

B. E. Attribute discovery
In a few real-life scenarios, the class imbalance ratio is

unknown. In such cases, an unsupervised technique should
discover semantically plausible regions in the data space. To
evaluate the proposed method’s ability to perform such a Fig. 6: Mode counting experiment result for stacked MNIST
task, we perform experiments where sample from PY are dataset. The proposed method is able to produce variety of
drawn with an assumed class ratio rather than a known ratio. modes after training.
Two experiments are performed on CelebA, first with the
assumption of 2 classes having a ratio of 70:30 and the second
with the assumption of 3 classes having a ratio of 10:30:60. In
the first experiment, the network discovers visibility of teeth
as an attribute to the faces whereas in the second it learns
to differentiate between the facial pose angles. Conditional
generation from both the experiments are shown in figure 4
and 5, respectively. Note that these attributes are not labelled
in the dataset but are discovered by our model.

C. F. Mode counting using proposed method
We trained the proposed method for mode counting ex-

periment on stacked MNIST dataset. It is able to generate (a) Real data (a) Generated data

993 modes. Some of the generated images are shown in Fig. 7: Density plots of true data and the proposed method’s
Fig. 6. Similar performance is observed in 8 component GMM generator output for 8 component GMM arranged over a circle
experiment, as shown in Fig. 7.



International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13735-019-00177-8

SHORT PAPER

A retrieval-based approach for diverse and image-specific adversary
selection

Rajvardhan Singh Ravat1 · Yashaswi Verma2

Received: 26 February 2019 / Revised: 20 July 2019 / Accepted: 4 September 2019 / Published online: 11 September 2019
© Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of Springer Nature 2019

Abstract
While deep neural network-based models have demonstrated compelling performance on various tasks in computer vision
and other fields, they have been found to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Particularly, deep convolutional neural network
(CNN)-basedmodels can be easily fooled by adding a small quasi-imperceptible perturbation to the input, thus resulting in sig-
nificant drop in prediction accuracies.Whilemost of the previousworks have focused on generating one adversary/perturbation
per model, it was recently shown that it is possible to learn a continuous distribution over adversarial perturbations for a model.
Building upon this work, in this paper, we propose a new technique for image-specific adversary selection and treat it as a
retrieval task. The proposed technique utilizes a learned model that ranks the perturbations in a given set of perturbations
based on their ability to fool with respect to a given sample. This model is a conditional determinantal point process model
that also explicitly induces diversity among the retrieved perturbations. We conduct experiments on the ImageNet dataset
using four popular deep CNN image classification models, and demonstrate that the proposed method consistently achieves
state-of-the-art fooling rates.

Keywords Adversarial attack · Deep CNN · Diversity · Determinantal point process

1. Introduction While most of the previous works have focused on gener-
ating one adversary/perturbation per CNNmodel [17,18,22],

It is well-acknowledged that modern machine learning- a recent work [20] showed that it is possible to learn a con-
based systems are prone to adversarial attacks [2,3,14]. An tinuous distribution over adversarial perturbations. It uses
adversarial sample is a malicious input with structured per- a generative adversarial network-based model (GAN) [8],
turbations that can fool a system and force it to infer wrong called Network for Adversary Generation (or NAG), to learn
predictions. Most of the deep convolutional neural network the distribution of the unknown adversarial perturbations.
(CNN)-based classifiers are also shown [17,20] to be fooled The freedom fromparametric assumptions on the distribution
by adversarial perturbations that are quasi-imperceptible to and unavailability of samples from the target distribution of
humans. Specifically, by adding such a quasi-imperceptible adversarial perturbations make the GAN framework a suit-
perturbation to the input, the label estimated by the deep neu- able choice for modelling such a distribution. In [20], it is
ral network changes with high probability.More importantly, shown that such a distribution can be used to efficiently gen-
adversarial samples can be transferred from one model to erate a large number of adversarial perturbations for a given
another and still achieve high fooling rates, even if the other classification network.
model has a different architecture and is trained on different While [20] provides an elegant approach to generate a
(but similar) data. large number of perturbations by randomly sampling from

the learned distribution, there is no way to decide how to
pick the most appropriate perturbation(s) with respect to a

B Yashaswi Verma given image. Hence, in [20], the authors use the average
yashaswi@iitj.ac.in fooling rate achieved by all the perturbations in a set. In

1. this paper, we attempt to address this limitation and propose
Circle of Life Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, India

a new technique for image-specific adversary/perturbation
2. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, selection from a set of perturbations. We pose this as a

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India

123



126 International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133

diversity-induced retrieval task using a conditional deter- butions and no training of replica of the target model. Their
minantal point process (DPP) model [13]. This model not approach is based on the fundamental hierarchical nature of
only allows to rank all the perturbations in a given set based the features learned by a target neural network. They also
on their fooling ability, but also explicitly enforces diversity explored the transferability of such perturbations to differ-
among them by utilizing negative correlations among the ent architectures trained on different data distributions. In
perturbations. The parameters of this DPP model are learned another paper, Papernot et al. [22] introduced a practical
from the training images and the outcomes of the perturba- attacking setup viamodel distillation to understand the black-
tions (fooled or not fooled) in a given set. During testing, the box attack, where there is no information about the target
most confident (in terms of diversity and estimated fooling model and its training data. They examined constructing a
capacity) “K” (e.g. 1, 3, 5 or 7) perturbations can be sam- substitute model to attack a black-box target model. Further,
pled using the learned DPP model individually for each test they also studied the transferability between deep neural net-
image. works and other traditional models such as decision trees and

To summarize, the contributions of this paper are: k-nearest neighbours.
In parallel to these works that have focused on studying

1. We present a new application of the well-known DPP different attacking aspects of adversaries, several defence
model in the context of diverse and image-specific techniques have also been proposed against the adversarial
adversary selection. attacks in neural networks [1,4,9,21,22]. However, adversar-

2. We extensively evaluate the proposed approach on the ial training [7,8,16,24] has been shown to hold good promise
popular ImageNet dataset using four deep CNN image for learning robust models. For example, Madry et al. [16]
classification networks, and demonstrate state-of-the-art showed that adversarial training on theMNIST dataset yields
fooling rates. models that are robust to white-box attacks, if the adversarial

examples used in training closelymaximize themodel’s loss.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we However, the MNIST dataset is peculiar; in that, there exists
discuss some of the notable advancements in the context of a simple closed-form denoising procedure (namely feature
adversarial attacks specifically focusing on deep CNNs. In binarization) which leads to robust models without adversar-
Sect. 3, we give a brief overview of the NAG approach [20] ial training, thus also explainingwhy robustness towhite-box
and the DPP model [13], and then present the proposed attacks is hard to scale to datasets such as ImageNet [24].
approach in Sect. 4. In Sect. 5, we present the experimen- Our work is motivated by the recent work of Mopuri
tal analysis, and finally conclude along with some directions et al. [20], where the authors demonstrated the possibil-
for future research in Sect. 6. ity of learning a continuous distribution over perturbations

with respect to a classification CNN using a GAN-based
framework,which they called asNetwork forAdversaryGen-

3. Related works eration (or NAG). However, as discussed before, this model
does not provide information about the most appropriate per-

Studying adversarial attacks in the context of deep neural turbationwith respect to a given image, and hence the average
networks has recently gained a lot of attention. In one of the fooling rate over all the perturbations in a given set of pertur-
initial papers, Szegedy et al. [23] showed that deep neural bations is considered. In this paper, we build upon this work
network-based machine learning systems could be fooled by and propose a novel DPP-based technique [13] that allows
adversarial perturbations irrespective ofwhether the system’s to retrieve diverse and image-specific perturbation(s) from a
performance was good or not, and such perturbations were set of perturbations. In the following section, we first give an
not distinguishable to human eyes. The authors also studied overview of NAG and DPP, and then present the proposed
the transferability of different models trained over the same approach.
dataset, and between the same or different model trained over
disjoint subsets of a dataset. The transferability aspect was
further studied by Goodfellow et al. [8], and attributed the 3 Background
phenomenon of transferability to the reason that an adversar-
ial perturbation is highly alignedwith theweight vector of the 3.1 Network for Adversary Generation (NAG)
model. Following these works, Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [18]
introduced universal adversarial perturbation (UAP), which As discussed above, all the methods proposed before NAG
is a single perturbation that is learned with respect to a given used some optimization approach to craft a single adversarial
dataset and prediction model. Motivated by this, Mopuri perturbation for full dataset. In NAG [20], for the first time, a
et al. [19] proposed a data-independent approach for learning generative approach based on GAN was proposed to model
a universal perturbation, with no sampling from data distri- the distribution of adversarial perturbations.

123



International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133 127

The standard GAN [8] has two components: a generator wise repulsion. To understand this, let us consider a subset
(G) and a discriminator (D). The generator takes a random y = {i, j} of two items i and j from Y such that Ly =
vector from a uniform distribution and learns to generate [Lii , Li j ; L ji , J j j ], with Lii and L j j being the individual
an image through a sequence of nonlinear transformations, correlation scores of the two items, respectively, while Li j
while the discriminator takes the image(s) produced by the and L ji denote their pairwise correlations. Then, we have
generator along with real image(s) and learns a discrimi-
native model that can distinguish between the real and the P(Y = {i, j}) ∝ Lii L j j − Li j L ji (2)
generated images. Both G and D are trained in an adversar-
ial manner using an alternative max–min optimization that We can observe that if the items i and j are the same (or
helps in improving both with several such iterations. fully correlated), then P(Y = {i, j}) = 0 (since Lii =

In NAG, the objective is to model the unknown distribu- L j j = Li j = L ji ). Similarly, if they are entirely different
tion of adversarial perturbations for a pre-trained classifier (a (or fully uncorrelated), then P(Y = {i, j}) = Lii L j j (since
deepCNNmodel). Hence, the paper introduces somemodifi- Li j = L ji = 0). In general, if i and j are dissimilar, then the
cations in the standardGAN framework: (i) the discriminator probability of observing them together will be more than that
is replaced by a pre-trained image classification model (e.g. of observing either one of them, and vice versa [13]. Thus,
VGGNet or ResNet) that is kept unchanged throughout the the most diverse subset of Y can be obtained by
training process, and (ii) instead of an adversarial loss, a new

s function is used that helps the generator to learn a wide y∗
los = argmax P(Y = y) = argmax det(Ly) (3)

y y
span of the space of perturbations, such that the perturbations
sampled from this space should result in incorrect classifica- This leads to an optimization problem that can be solved
tion by the discriminator (image classifier) after adding these based on a given task.
to the test images. It is worth noting that this attribute of the
generated perturbations helps in the training of the genera-
tor, even though the true distribution of the perturbations is 4 Proposedmethod
unknown.

The training (image) set is denoted as X = {x1, x2, . . . , xn},
3.2 Determinantal point process (DPP) where xi ∈ Rd is the d-dimensional feature representing the

i th image. This representation is computed using the features
DPP [13] is a probabilistic model that ensures diversity extracted from the penultimate fully connected layer of a pre-
among a subset of samples picked from a set. This was trained deep CNN-based image classification model (such as
initially used to describe the Pauli exclusion principle, VGGNet or ResNet). LetT = {1, 2, . . . ,m} denote the set of
according to which the same quantum state cannot be occu- perturbations that are generated using theNAGapproach [20]
pied simultaneously by two identical particles [15]. Because for the given classification model. For each image i , we have
of its ability to model the notion of exclusion, DPP has been a subset of perturbations yi ⊂ T that lead to misclassifica-
used for modelling diversity in a variety of applications such tion of that image by the classification model, i.e. the class
as document summarization [12], video summarization [6], predicted by the pre-trained classifier after adding such a per-
image ranking [11] and image tagging [25]. Below, we give turbation is incorrect (different from the ground-truth class).
a brief description of DPP. So, the training data for the DPP model consists of pairs of

Let Y = {1, 2, . . . , N } denote a set of N items. In DPP, the form {(xi , yi )}ni=1. Using this, we learn a model that can
we define a discrete probability distribution over all the 2N predict a diverse subset of (K ) perturbations with respect to
possible subsets of Y . Let y be a subset of Y , and Y denote each image and also maximizes the fooling rate.
the random variable of selecting y. Then, we have Let Px (y) denote a parametric conditional DPP model

W
with respect to an image and its perturbation subset y, and is

P 5]:
(Y = y) = det(Ly)

(1) defined as [13,2
det(L + I)

det(Lx
y(W))

Here, det · denotes the determinant function, I denotes the Px (y) = 4)
( ) W det(Lx(W) + (

I)
identity matrix, L denotes the kernel matrix of DPP that is
constrained to be positive semi-definite (i.e.L ∈ ×N

S+N ), and where Lx(W) is a positive semi-definite kernel matrix for
Ly is a sub-matrix ofLwhose rows and columns are selected all the m perturbations, the matrix W ∈ Rd×m denotes the
according to the indices in y. parameters of this kernel matrix (one learned vector for each

The most interesting aspect of DPP is the determinant perturbation), I denotes the identity matrix, and Lx
y(W) ∈

function that allows to encode negative correlations or pair- R|y|×|y| is a sub-matrix of Lx(W) generated by extracting

123



128 International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133

the rows and columns corresponding to the perturbations ∑n ∑m
L(W) = −1 η

log Pxi (yi ) + ∥ ∥
∥w 2

j∥ (
4. 2 7)

in y. n W
i=1 j=1

As we saw in the previous section, the determinant of a ⎡ ⎤
matrix can be used for encoding negative correlations, which m

= η ∑∥ ∥ ∑n
∥w j∥

5. 1 ∑
⎣

6. − wTx
7. n j i − log det(Syi )

⎦
in turn enforce diversity. Here, we consider the determinant
of the Lx matrix. If the determinant of Lx

j,k is small, it would j=1 i=1 j∈yi
⎡ ⎤

mean that the j th and the kth perturbations are highly corre- n ∑ ∏
+ 1 ∑

lated. On the other hand, if this determinant is zero, it would log⎣ [exp(wT
n j xi )] det(Sy′ )⎦ (8)

imply that these perturbations are fully correlated. As it is i=1 y′ ′ i

i⊂T j∈yi
evident, this model discourages redundancy among the per-
turbations within a subset.

For a given image I represented by feature vector x, to As shown in [25], since L(W) is a convex function, it can

find the most appropriate perturbation(s) among all the per- be optimized using a gradient descent-based method. The

turbations in a given set, we use two measures: fooling error gradient of the L(W) with respect to w j is given by:

confidence and diversity. The “fooling error confidence”
denotes the confidence of the learned DPP model in fool-

∂L ∑n
ing the classifier after adding a particular perturbation to the = ηw

w j − 1
xi1 j∈y

j n i

input image. The “diversity” refers to the feature-level dis- i=1

similarity between two perturbations, where the features are ∑n ∑
+ 1 exp(wT

j xi ) det(Sy′ )1 j∈y′
extracted using the penultimate fully connected layer of the ∑ ∏ i i

n
i=1 y′

i⊂T y′ e p w
i⊂

T
T j ′∈y′ [ x (

i j ′xi )] det(Sy′ )
given classification model. Using these two measures, we i

define the kernel matrix as: (9)
⎡ ⎤

∑n ∑
= 1

Lx
j,k(W) = qxj q

x ηw j + x i
i ⎣ Px

k S j,k (5) (y′
W i )1 j∈y′ − 1 j∈y ⎦ 10)

i i (
n

i=1 y′
i⊂T

Here, W = [w1,w2, . . . ,wm] denotes the matrix of the
learned parameters, with each column corresponding to the Here, 1 j∈yi is an∑indicator function which is 1 when j ∈ yi
parameters for one perturbation. qxj = exp(0.5 × (wT

j x)) is and0otherwise. y′
i⊂T Pxi (y′

W i )1 j∈y′ − 1 j∈y
i i is themarginal

the fooling error confidence term, which indicates the confi- probability of xi with respect to the j th perturbation, which
is equivalent to the j th diagonal element K x

dence of fooling the classification model after adding the j th i
j j of the marginal

perturbation to the image x. The matrix S ∈ Rm×m denotes kernelKxi (W). Themarginal kernelKxi (W) and its j th diag-
the pairwise similarity among all pairs of perturbations and onal entry (K xi

j j ) are given by:
is computed as S j,k = 〈f j , fk〉, where f j denotes the (nor-
malized) feature representation of the j th perturbation and is
extracted using the penultimate fully connected layer of the Kxi (W) = Lxi (W)

(
Lxi (W) + 11)

given image classification model. It is important to note that I
this similarity matrix is independent of the input image. ∑m λ ′

K xi j
j j = v j ′( j)

2
After putting the value of Lx

y(W), Eq. 4 can be rewritten (12)

as: j ′= λ ′ +
1. j 1

∏
jεy [exp(wT

j x)] det(Sy)
Px where λ j ′ and v j ′ are the j ′th eigenvalue and eigenvector,

(y) = ∑ ∏
W

y′⊂ T
T jεy′ [ (

exp(w j x)]
6)

det(Sy′) respectively, of the kernel Lxi (W), and are derived from
t∑he singular value decomposition of Lxi (W) (Lxi (W) =

m
j ′=1 λ j ′v j ′vTj ′ ). From this, we can rewrite the gradient as:

In the above equation, Sy ∈ R|y|×|y| corresponding to y ⊂ T
and Sy′ ∈ R|y′|×|y′| corresponding to y′ ⊂ T are the
sub-matrices of the S matrix obtained by extracting the cor- ∂L ∑n

responding rows and columns. = ηw
w j + 1 [ ]

x xi
i K

n j j − 1 j∈yi (13)
j

The parameters of the DPP model (W) are learned by i=1

minimizing the negative log-likelihood of Px (y) for all the
W

images in the training set and with l2 regularization on the Using the above equation, we learn the W matrix using a
learned weights: stochastic gradient descent algorithm similar to [25].

123



International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133 129

Table 1 Comparison of the fooling rates using different methods for different image classification models and sizes of the perturbation sets

Method ResNet-50 ResNet-152 VGG-19 VGG-F ResNet-50 ResNet-152 VGG-19 VGG-F

#Perturbations (m) = 20 #Perturbations (m) = 40
Baseline-1* (ideal) 94.74 97.55 94.33 99.18 95.05 97.65 94.73 99.32
Baseline-2 (all) 68.05 66.61 63.22 77.03 65.84 62.98 60.25 73.86
Baseline-3 (random) 84.94 87.72 84.45 93.85 84.50 87.52 84.27 93.60
Average (NAG [20]) 84.79 87.86 84.34 93.95 84.46 87.45 84.19 93.50
Ours (top-1) 88.03 90.92 86.63 95.20 87.99 90.92 86.61 93.79

#Perturbations (m) = 60 #Perturbations (m) = 80
Baseline-1* (ideal) 95.13 97.72 94.86 99.35 95.22 97.33 94.92 99.35
Baseline-2 (all) 65.02 61.13 58.79 70.83 64.45 60.58 58.13 70.33
Baseline-3 (random) 84.37 87.32 83.90 93.79 84.34 87.50 84.17 93.83
Average (NAG [20]) 84.46 87.42 84.00 93.77 84.30 87.40 84.07 93.83
Ours (top-1) 88.43 90.92 84.61 94.71 87.99 90.93 86.97 95.04

Please refer text for more details

5 Experiments which is the percentage of test images that are wrongly clas-
sified by at least one of the perturbations out of the top-K

5.1 Experimental details retrieved perturbations.

We use the ImageNet ILSVRC 2014 dataset, and consider 5.2 Comparedmethods
the 50k test images with 1000 classes. This set contains 50
images per class. For our experiments, we split this dataset We compare our results with four methods:
into 80% training and 20% test sets, by sampling every fifth
image of the dataset and including it to the test set. After this, 1. Baseline-1* (at least one)Thismeasures the percentage
we get 40k images in the training set and 10k images in the of test images that fooled by at least one perturbation in
test set, with 40 and 10 images per class in the training and the given set. This also indicates the upper bound (ideal
test sets, respectively. fooling rate) on the maximum achievable fooling rate

To generate perturbations, we use the NAG approach [20], with a given set of perturbations and a given classifica-
and randomly generate sets of m = {20, 40, 60, 80} pertur- tion network.
bations. As pre-trained image classification models, we use 2. Baseline-2 (all) This measures the percentage of test
four popular deep CNN models: ResNet-50 [10], ResNet- images that are fooled by all the perturbations in the
152 [10], VGG-19 [5] and VGG-F [5]. We use the penulti- given set. This also denotes the lower bound on the
mate fully connected layer (of themodel under consideration) achievable fooling rate.
to extract the feature vector. The dimension of the extracted 3. Baseline-3 (random) This measures the percentage of
feature vector is 4096 in the VGG models and 2048 in the test images that fooled by a randomly chosen perturba-
ResNet models. tion from the given set.

The parameters for stochastic gradient descent are set as 4. Average (NAG [20]) This denotes the average of the
follows: the batch size is 1024, the initial learning rate is 1 fooling rate of all the perturbations in the given set. This
and the decay factor is 0.98. The learning rate is updated is the approach thatwas adopted inNAG[20] to compute
after every iteration with a momentum of 0.9. The maximum the fooling rates of the generated perturbations, and is
number of epochs is 100 and the trade-off parameter for the also the current state-of-the-art in terms of fooling rate.
l2 regularization is η = 0.0001.

After training, we get the learned W matrix, which con- 5.3 Results and discussion
tains one learned vector corresponding to each perturbation.
During testing, for a given test image denoted by x, we eval- Table 1 compares the fooling rates achieved using different
uate qxj = exp(0.5 × (wT

j x)) for each perturbation j ∈ methods. These fooling rates are averaged over five randomly
{1, . . . ,m}, and then retrieve the top-K (K ∈ {1, 3, 5, 7}) sampled sets of {20, 40, 60, 80} perturbations. We can make
perturbations. Using these, we calculate the fooling rates of the following observations from these results: (a) The fooling
the top-K perturbations retrieved individually for each of the rates achieved using Baseline-1 are the maximum, which is
test images, and then average them over all the test images, understandable as these represent the ideal fooling rates. (b)

123



130 International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133

ResNet-50
# Perturbations = 20 # Perturbations = 40 # Perturbations = 60 # Perturbations = 80

ResNet-152
# Perturbations = 20 # Perturbations = 40 # Perturbations = 60 # Perturbations = 80

VGG-19
# Perturbations = 20 # Perturbations = 40 # Perturbations = 60 # Perturbations = 80

VGG-F
# Perturbations = 20 # Perturbations = 40 # Perturbations = 60 # Perturbations = 80

Fig. 1 Fooling rates on varying the number of top-K (K = 1, 3, 5, 7) denoted using dotted lines in red, blue and yellow, respectively. (Best
perturbations retrieved using the proposed approach (solid green line). viewed in colour.) (color figure online)
The results for Baseline-1, Baseline-2 and Average (NAG [20]) are

For Baseline-2, while the results are the lowest among the proposed approach consistently achieves the maximum fool-
compared methods, they are still quite reasonable, indicating ing rates for different sizes of perturbation sets and for all the
that for each image classification network, around 60–70% image classification networks, with absolute improvements
of the generated perturbations result in misclassification of of around 2–4%, thus validating the utility of the proposed
all the test images. (c) The results using Baseline-3 and aver- approach.
age approaches are comparable, which indicates that for this In Fig. 1, we show the fooling rates achieved by vary-
task, taking average over all the perturbations as done in the ing the number of the top-K retrieved perturbations for
NAG [20] approach is as good as picking a random perturba- K = 1, 3, 5, 7. Here, if at least one of the retrieved per-
tion. This is also amotivation for our approach, so that we can turbation(s) leads to misclassification of the given image, we
pick image-specific perturbation(s) and achieve higher fool- consider it as a hit. From the figure, we can observe that as
ing rates. (d) The best perturbation (top-1) retrieved using the we increase K , we achieve higher fooling rates as expected.

123



International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133 131

ResNet-50 ResNet-152 VGG-19 VGG-F

“Theatre Curtain” “Spider Web” “Apron” “Wardrobe”

GT: “Newfoundland” “Peacock” “Cairn” “Candy Store” “Briard”

“Domodo Dragon” “Chainlink Fence” “Poncho” “Church”

Theatre Curtain Shower Curtain Apron Website

GT: “Swimming Trunks” Shower Curtain Chainlink Fence Book Jacket Llama

Chainlink Fence Fur Coat Pop Bottle Church

Fig. 2 For example, images, the top three perturbations retrieved using the proposed approach. The label predicted after adding a perturbation to
the input image is also shown below each perturbation

However, interestingly, these fooling rates get quite close to ent for different perturbations. These results qualitatively
Baseline-1 (the ideal fooling rates) in many cases. This indi- show the promise of the proposed approach in retrieving
cates that in most of the cases, the subset of perturbations diverse perturbations. Further, these also show that diversity
(which is much smaller than the complete set of perturba- in perturbations also leads to diversity in (wrong) predic-
tions) retrieved using our approach for each image contains tions. In some applications, this can be more harmful than
at least one perturbation that can fool the given classification consistently predicting the same wrong label, and can be an
network. interesting direction for future research.

In Fig. 2, we show the top three perturbations retrieved In Fig. 3, we try to illustrate the weakness of the proposed
using the proposed approach for some examples images. approach using an example image. We observe that while
Here, we can observe that these perturbations exhibit (visual) there is diversity among the top three retrieved perturbations,
diversity among them. Further, while they not only lead to not all of them are able to fool the respective classification
misclassification, the predicted wrong labels are also differ- models. Though it is difficult to justify these predictions,

123

3rd Best 2nd Best Best 3rd Best 2nd Best Best



132 International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133

ResNet-50 ResNet-152 VGG-19 VGG-F

Pred: Vulture Pred: Vulture Pred: Vulture Pred: Vulture

GT: “Vulture” Pred: Peacock Pred: Vulture Pred: Vulture Pred: European Gallinule

Pred: Vulture Pred: Black Grouse Pred: Vulture Pred: European Gallinule

Fig. 3 An example image with the top three perturbations retrieved using the proposed approach, where not all of the perturbations lead to incorrect
predictions. The label predicted after adding a perturbation to the input image is also shown below each perturbation

one reason for this could be the availability of challenging References
examples in the training dataset (where background is quite
similar to the foreground object as in the image shown) that 1. Baluja S, Fischer I (2018) Learning to attack: adversarial trans-

leads to strong training of the CNN classifiers. formation networks. Association for Advancements in Artificial
Intelligence, Menlo Park

2. Biggio B, Corona I, Maiorca D, Nelson B, Šrndić N, Laskov P,
GiacintoG, Roli F (2013) Evasion attacks againstmachine learning
at test time. In: Joint European conference onmachine learning and

6 Summary and conclusion knowledge discovery in databases, pp 387–402
3. Biggio B, Fumera G, Roli F (2014) Pattern recognition systems

under attack: design issues and research challenges. Int J Pattern
In this paper, we have proposed a new method for image- Recognit Artif Intell 28:1460002
specific adversary selection.We treat this as a subset retrieval 4. Carlini N, Wagner DA (2017) Towards evaluating the robustness
task, and formulate it using a conditional DPP model that of neural networks. In: IEEE symposium on security and privacy,

pp 39–57
can explicitly enforce diversity among the subset of adver- 5. Chatfield K, Simonyan K, Vedaldi A, Zisserman A (2014) Return
saries/perturbations retrieved from a fixed and large set of of the devil in the details: delving deep into convolutional nets. In:
perturbations. The experiments using popular image clas- British machine vision conference
sification networks and different sizes of perturbation sets 6. Gong B, Chao W, Grauman K, Sha F (2014) Diverse sequential

subset selection for supervised video summarization. In: Advances
demonstrate that the proposed method consistently achieves in neural information processing systems
state-of-the-art fooling rates. As per our knowledge, while 7. Goodfellow I, Shlens J, Szegedy C (2015) Explaining and harness-
the need for both diverse as well as image-specific per- ing adversarial examples. In: International conference on learning
turbations has been noted in the past [7], ours is the first representations

8. Goodfellow IJ, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B,Warde-Farley D,
attempt that fulfils these requirements in a systematic man- Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y (2014) Generative adversarial nets.
ner, and thus can be quite useful for designing new defence Neural Inf Process Syst 2:2672–2680
mechanisms that would allow prediction models to be robust 9. Gu S, Rigazio L (2014) Towards deep neural network architectures
against adversarial attacks. In future, we would like to for- robust to adversarial examples. CoRR arXiv:1412.5068

10. He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2016) Deep residual learning for
mulate some end-to-end learning framework for diverse and image recognition. In: IEEE conference on computer vision and
image-specific adversary selection task, and also thoroughly pattern recognition, pp 770–778
investigate the general “attack–defend” problem. 11. KuleszaA, Taskar B (2011) k-DPPs: fixed-size determinantal point

processes. In: International conference on machine learning
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Konda Reddy 12. Kulesza A, Taskar B (2011) Learning determinantal point pro-
Mopuri for helpful discussion on his paper [20]. RSR would like to cesses. In: Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 419–427
thank the Ministry of Human Resource Development (India) for finan- 13. Kulesza A, Taskar B (2012) Determinantal point processes for
cial support. YV would like to thank the Department of Science and machine learning. Found Trends Mach Learn 5:123–286
Technology (India) for the INSPIRE Faculty Award.

123

3rd Best 2nd Best Best



International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval (2020) 9:125–133 133

14. Kurakin A, Goodfellow IJ, Bengio S (2016) Adversarial machine 21. Nayebi A, Ganguli S (2017) Biologically inspired protection of
learning at scale. CoRR arXiv:1611.01236 deep networks from adversarial attacks. CoRR arXiv:1703.09202

15. Macchi O (1975) The coincidence approach to stochastic point 22. Papernot N, McDaniel P, Goodfellow I, Jha S, Celik ZB, Swami A
processes. Adv Appl Probab 7:83–122. https://doi.org/10.2307/ (2017) Practical black-box attacks against machine learning. In:
1425855 Asia conference on computer and communications security, pp

16. Madry A, Makelov A, Schmidt L, Tsipras D, Vladu A (2018) 506–519
Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In: 23. SzegedyC, ZarembaW, Sutskever I, Bruna J, ErhanD,Goodfellow
International conference on learning representations I, Fergus R (2014) Intriguing properties of neural networks. In:

17. Moosavi-Dezfooli S, Fawzi A, Frossard P (2016) Deepfool: a sim- International conference on learning representations
ple and accurate method to fool deep neural networks. In: IEEE 24. Tramèr F, Kurakin A, Papernot N, Goodfellow I, Boneh D,
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 2574– McDaniel P (2018) Ensemble adversarial training: attacks and
2582 defenses. In: International conference on learning representations

18. Moosavi-Dezfooli SM, Fawzi A, Fawzi O, Frossard P (2017) Uni- 25. Wu B, Jia F, Liu W, Ghanem B (2017) Diverse image annotation.
versal adversarial perturbations. In: IEEE conference on computer In: IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), pp 86–94

19. Mopuri KR, Garg U, Radhakrishnan VB (2017) Fast feature fool:
a data independent approach to universal adversarial perturbations. Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
In: British machine vision conference dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

20. Mopuri KR, Ojha U, Garg U, Babu RV (2018) NAG: network for
adversary generation. In: IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp 742–751

123



Pattern Recognition Letters 145 (2021) 1–7

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Pattern Recognition Letters

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/patrec

A rotation and scale invariant approach for multi-oriented floor plan

image retrieval

Rasika Khade a, a
Krupa Jariwala ,  Chiranjoy Chattopadhyay b,  ∗

, Umapada Pal c

a Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology, Surat 395007, India
b Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur 342037, India
c Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata 700108, India

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Article history: An automatic system for analysis and retrieval of building floor plans images is helpful for the architects
Received 18 June 2020 while designing new projects and providing recommendations to the buyers. For such systems, query by
Revised 18 November 2020 example is preferred over query by keyword, for which user’s requirements must be available in digi-
Accepted 17 January 2021

tal image form. Floor plans are converted to digital form by scanning and often get rotated slightly by a
Available online 22 January 2021

certain degree of angle during digitization. In this paper, we have proposed a geometric feature-based ap-
Keywords: proach for floor plan image retrieval and our key contribution is to handle different kinds of rotation and



Floor plan scale while retrieving similar floor plan from the database. Our framework is divided into three phases,
Retrieval namely outer shape feature extraction, internal object feature extraction, followed by matching and re-
Rotation trieval. For our experimentation, we have rotated images of ROBIN dataset as currently no rotated floor
Scale plan dataset was available. Our experiment shows that the proposed methodology outperforms recent
Invariant

competing methods.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction straints between pairs of nearest points around a keypoint was
proposed by Dang et al. [10] . Ahmed et al. [1] proposed a method

The architect manually studies several reference projects to pro- for segregation of thick, medium and thin walls. In [2] , extraction

vide suggestions to their customers for building new houses. How- of structural and semantic features from a given floor plan was
ever, manual searching of floor plans as per the customer’s require- proposed. The wall segmentation method based on bag-of-patches
ment is a tedious task. Query by example approach uses an image have been proposed in de las Heras et al. [12] , de las Heras et al.
of a floor plan to match with other images in the database. Digi- [13] , de las Heras et al. [ 15 , 16 ].
tization of floor plans via scanners often causes different rotations Several researchers have proposed graph matching techniques
of the original image (see Fig. 1 ); however, the rotation will not [21,24,35] for floor plans retrieval. In [22] , string-based method

be ◦
more than 5 , on either side. In the literature handling such a was proposed for symbol spotting in architectural plans. [14] intro-

scenario for floor plan image analysis has remained a blind spot of duced a syntactic model for architectural floor plan interpretation.
scholarship. In [27–29] , the authors proposed techniques for retrieving floor

Content Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) systems like QBIC [23] , plans based on structural and semantic similarity. We have pro-
VisualSeek [31] , SIMPLicity [33] , WebSeek [30] , and Blobworld posed a rotation-invariant approach for multi-oriented floor plan

[5] were developed in the past. Recently, a survey of local fea- retrieval, and therefore we’ve studied various techniques that effi-
tures with deep learning techniques is given in Zheng et al. ciently handle the rotation in image analysis.
[34] . To understand drawings in CAD environment [21] have pro- In the literature, works such as [3,8,20,26] , were popular for
posed Straight Line Hough Transform (SLHT) technique for removal handling rotation of images. [4] compensated the large rotation an-
of inaccurate strokes in hand-drawn images. de las Heras et al. gles using CNN along with Gaussian Process-based Bayesian Opti-
[17] used statistical patch-based segmentation and structural pat- mizer. In [11] , a rotation-invariant transformation functions is pro-
tern recognition method for analysis and interpretation of the floor posed to integrate rotation into the original zero one label matrix.
plan images. A new extensions of SRIF based on geometrical con- In the field of document image analysis, papers are dealing with

rotation invariance [6,25,32] . The CNN based rotation and scale-

∗ invariant approaches are introduced by Cohen and Welling [9] ,
Corresponding author.

Jaderberg et al. [18] , Kim et al. [19] .
E-mail address: chiranjoy@iitj.ac.in (C. Chattopadhyay).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2021.01.020
0167-8655/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.



R. Khade, K. Jariwala, C. Chattopadhyay et al. Pattern Recognition Letters 145 (2021) 1–7

Algorithm 1 Door end point detection, outer shape extraction.

Input: Floor Plan image ( I F )


Output: Outer shape( O )

A 1 = Ī
F

d { }

1. = I  se = { c N
∈ E | c = a + b for some a ∈ I and b ∈ se

F 1 F 1}  


5 ×5
: dilation, se 1 ∈ 1



e 1 = d {}se = { x N
∈ E | x + b ∈ d ∀ b ∈ se    :erosion,

1. 2 1 2}
3

se 2 ∈

{ ×3
1

0 if e 1(x, y ) > 10
x, y )

q 1(  =



maxV al otherwise

d 2 = q = { c ∈ EN
| c = a + b for some a ∈ q  se

1.  se
1. 1 and b ∈

1}
e 2 = d EN

| x + b ∈ d
2.  se = { x ∈

3. 2∀ b ∈ se
2}

A 2 = ē  A  bitwise NOT of e
4. 2:

2
Fig. 1. Illustration of the problem with a floor plan and three instances with vary- J = A 1 AND A l objects (bitwise AND)

5.  J: Interna


ing orientation from the dataset proposed by Sharma et al. [29] .
d 3 = J  se

1.  se
1

e 3 = J  se
2

IC = d
3 − e  I  Contour of image (after d

3 C :
3 − e

5)


H = get _con v ex _hul l (IC )  H:convex hull for doors


E = A 1 AND H  E: End points of doors on wall


P = []  Index corresponds to another point from set H.
I D = A  I closed door image
1. D:



for i=1 to E do  For each end point of door on wall
for j=1 to H do  For each Convex hull of door

d = point_poly_test( E[i], H[j]))  d:distance
Fig. 2. An illustration of the proposed framework. Solid arrow: Query processing if d< 3 . 0 then

stage, Dashed arrow: Offline feature extraction stage.
S = E(i)  S:selected_points
if P [ j]  = φ then

The It = d raw (i, P [ j ])


proposed framework takes a floor plan image as input and

retrieves else
similar floor plans from a repository. We differ from the

other P [ j] = i
rotation invariant image retrieval algorithms in (i) consider-

ing end if
the flipped version of an image as a different category and (ii)

matching end if
images that are slightly rotated but of the same class.

Our end for
significant contributions are: (i) proposed a novel algorithm

for end for
outer shape extraction from floor plan images, (ii) proposed ge-

ometric d 4 = I  se
D 1

features for rotation and scale-invariant floor plan match-
ing, e 4 = I  se

D 2
and (iii) performed detailed experiments on original and ro-

tated O = d 4 − e
4

samples of ROBIN dataset.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 dis-

cusses the proposed framework and algorithms. Section 3 discusses
dataset description and different experimental results followed by slope ( M ) and angle ( θ ). The outer shape based features are inter-
concluding remarks in Section 4 . dependent on each other, and hence initially we have represented

the extracted contours by minimum points using polygon approx-
2. Proposed framework imation method. These approximated points give the set of corner

points (C = { a 1, a n is total number of cor-
2, . . . , a n} ) on O, where





Fig. 2 depicts proposed framework comprising of three phases. ners on O, and a i is a corner point. The area ( A r) of the outer shape




All the phases are described in following sub-sections. is calculated as:

∑n


2.1. (x i + x )
+1 i)(y − y

i +1 i
Outer shape based feature extraction A r = ∀ iε{ 0 , 1 , . . . , n − 1 } (1)



2

i =0
The outer shape of a floor plan is an important feature as we

are where C = { a 1(x ) , a (x y (x
0, y

0 2 1,
1) . . . a n

n , y ) } are the coordi-
−1 n −1

dealing with CBIR. The existing rotation sensitive framework by
Sharma nates of the corner points.

and Chattopadhyay [27] efficiently extracts the outer shape
of Floor plan images vary in terms of size and shape, and thus

floor plan images without any rotation. However, the framework
of for better performance of the proposed framework, it is manda-

[27] cannot handle rotated images and hence we have intro-
duced tory to find centroid (C r) of O . The geometric features, namely dis-



a new algorithm ( Algorithm 1 ) for the same. From a given

floor tance ( D), slope ( M ), and angle ( θ ), is calculated concerning the
plan ( I F ), first we detect the door endpoints, which are lo-



cated centroid (C r) of the floor plan. The centroid C

r(C x, C ) is calculated

y
on the walls. Then we remove the doors from the image to

have with the set of extracted corner points ( C ) as per Eq. (2) . Regard-
gaps along the outer walls of I F . Next, we connect a pair of



door ing the centroid (C r) of the outer layout, the floor plan is divided



endpoints that belongs to the same door by a straight line to
establish into four equal quadrants: Q 1, Q ter-clockwise di-

2, Q

3, and Q

4 coun


the continuity. Finally, by tracing the outer wall we are
able rection and distributed the extracted corner points C into their re-

to obtain the outer shape ( O ) of I F . Fig. 3 a–h depicts the in-


termediate spect
stages of Algorithm 1 .

After [ive quadrant.
]

computation of the O of I F , we have computed the other
x 0 + x . + x n y + y

n
1. + ..

0 1 + ... + y


features C r = , (2)


such as area ( A r), corners ( C ), quadrants ( Q), distance ( D ),
n n

2



R. Khade, K. Jariwala, C. Chattopadhyay et al. Pattern Recognition Letters 145 (2021) 1–7

Fig. 3. An illustration of the intermediate stages of feature extraction process.

M 2 are the slopes of two candidate sides a 2C r and a


1C r, respec-




tively. The slopes are calculated as:

M 1 = a 2[ y ] − C r[ y ]







a 2[ x ] − ; a 1[


M 2 = y ] − C r[ y ]

(3)


C r[ x ] a
1[ x ] − C r[ x ]



These slopes are further used for angle (θ ) calculation as
θ = −1 M M

1−

2
tan 1+ e e, M 1 and M epr sen s s op

2. r e t l


M , wh r es of two
1. M

2
lines adjacent to centroid of the floor plan. The set of features
extracted over outer shape of floor plan represented as F 1 =



{ C , A , D, M , Q, θ} . Fig. 4 depicts this features ( F 1) along with or-


der of computation.
Fig. 4. An illustration depicting the features extracted from a floor plan image.

2.2. Internal object based feature extraction

Labeling of corners points is essential for their unique iden- Here our idea is to consider various small internal parts of the
tification, as the proposed approach extracts and stores features floor plan as objects. We compared two state-of-the-art object de-
for further computation. As illustrated in Fig. 4 , for a given quad- tection techniques in this work, i.e., You Look Only Once (YOLO)
rant Q k where k ε { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } , a pair of consecutive corner points and Faster Region-based Convolutional Neural Network (FR-CNN)



(a i, a i  n  h   fo m  riangles in respective quadrant Q



+1) a d t e Cr r s t . One
k model for detection. Hence, we have trained both the models over



such triangle formed by { a 1, a 2, C r} for the first quadrant is high-
the original and rotated ROBIN dataset samples in this phase. We



lighted in Fig. 4 . An angle θ is computed between the centroid C r have trained these models over 12 different classes (furniture ob-
and corner points C as shown in Fig. 4 . These angles are sorted jects), namely, armchair, bed, coffee_table, round_table, large_sofa,
in ascending order and give unique sequence to corner points as small_sofa, sink, twin_sink, small_sink, large_sink, tub, and din-
{ a 0, a 1, a . . . a

2. } n

n −1 i counter clockwise of quadrant as shown in ing_table. Section 3.2 illustrates that FR-CNN has better localiza-


Fig. 3 i. These corner points and centroid of layout give us a unique tion accuracy than YOLO. This model incorporates query image or
star-like structure having n meaningful triangles for each floor plan dataset images as input and yields as output a set of labeled ob-
(refer Fig. 3 j). We have calculated and stored geometric features jects and their respective bounding rectangle, depicted in Fig. 3 (k).
for each triangle, such as distance, slope, and angle. Also, we have To deal with internal objects and their placements, the centroid

taken care of every corner’s position on the layout. For that, we are of each object (C r ) i  a c l t d u i g t e height (h ) and width

O  s c l u a e  s n  h


considering the total number of quadrants and corners. The dis- (w ) of its respective bounding rectangle as C r O = (h/ 2 , w/ 2) . Us-


tance of each corner point (x i, y i) √from the centroid of the floor ing the same approach of outer shape-based feature extraction, we




plan has been calculated as D = (x i − C x)2
+ (y − C

y)2
i  , where have calculated the internal object-based feature. The centroid of



i
∀ i ∈ { 0 , 1 , . . . , n − 1 } . all objects and the center of the bounding rectangle gives another

The slope is another important feature. Here for each meaning- unique star-like structure for the internal objects (refer Fig. 3 (l)).
ful triangles we have considered slope of two sides which are in- From this star-like structure, geometric features such as distance
tersecting at the centroid. For example, as shown in Fig. 4 , M 1 and ( O D), quadrant ( O Q ), slope ( O M), and angle ( O ) re com

θ a puted and



3



R. Khade, K. Jariwala, C. Chattopadhyay et al. Pattern Recognition Letters 145 (2021) 1–7

stored in the feature database. The set of features extracted over
internal objects are represented as F 2 = { O D, O θ , O O

M,
Q} .



2.3. Matching and retrieval

Matching phase incorporates matching as per outer shape
based features ( F 1) as well as matching as per internal object



based features ( F 2). For matching as per outer shape based fea-


tures, its query image q
( F ) and dataset i

images ( F ) are matched

using Eq. (4) and average match cost is calculated using Eq. (5) ,
where DS represents size of dataset images, jε{ 1 , 2 } , F j represents



the jth features and n j represents their respective count. Let F k de-
j

notes the kth component of the jth feature. Here, for match cost ψ
based on outer shape features F j = F 1 and n j = n j = 1 , then

1. If




F jk represents the feature is outer shaped based, and k denotes


the index of the feature components { C , A , D, M , Q, θ} ranging
between { 1 [− 6 } .

[ ] ] DS


ψ(F  F i q


jk)
i
=  jk − n j

F ( )


jk k Fig. 5. Comparison between YOLO and R-CNN on object spotting.
= 4

1. i =1

( ) [ ]D S
n j 3.2. Qualitative results

i 1 ∑



A v g F j =

ψ(F i
jk) (5)



n

j
k =1 i=1 One of the critical components of the proposed framework is



the detection of the internal symbols. Fig. 5 compares the perfor-
The average feature match cost ( A v g)  is calculated using mance between YOLO and FR-CNN. The YOLO model could not lo-

Eq. (5) and then sorted in ascending order using Eq. (6) as min- calize several objects present within the floor plan images. How-
imum dis[tance gives maxi]mum similarity. ever, the FR-CNN model can successfully detect the symbols. It

is evident from these examples that FR-CNN performs far better
S ( )i DS



= sort asc(A
i

j  g(F  = (6)
v

j) )
i hile detecting the furniture within a floor plan image.

1. than YOLO w


Hence, we have adapted FR-CNN in this framework. Fig. 6 , shows
For matching as per internal object-based features, the sorted

the top 5 retrieved results under various conditions.
results of matching as per outer shape-based features up to the

The details of such variations in the query samples of Fig. 6 are
last relevant image for a query is considered instead of the com-

as follows: (a1) right rotated, (a2) left rotated, (b1) scale 25% , (b2)
plete dataset for calculating match cost using Eq. 4 with F j = F 2



= scale 125% , (c1) blur (Kernel Size 10 × 10 ), (c2) salt and pepper
and n j  n 2. Further, the average match cost for internal object-



noise, with probability 0.005 and (d1) an example where, the erro-
based features is calculated using Eq. (5) . The retrieved results are

neously retrieved samples are present and the same is highlighted

sorted in ascending order using Eq. (6) to get the final rank list
using a red bounding box. The Rank 1, Rank 2, . . . , Rank 5 rep-

for the query image that comprises images up to the last relevant
resent the top 5 retrieved results for each query image. Fig. 6 de-

image for the query image.
picts that all the top 5 retrieval results belong to the same class
as that of the query image (except the last row). It is also evident

3. Experiments and from the results in Fig. 6 that the proposed framework is robust
results

to variation in scale and rotation. In Section 3.4 , we quantitatively
3.1. report the top-k retrieval performance to show the effectiveness

Dataset description
of the proposed framework. The last row of Fig. 6 shows a result

According ists in the top 5 retrieved

to Sharma and Chattopadhyay where an erroneously retrieved sample ex
[27] , ROBIN is more

suitable eved results are shown in the red

for semantic-based retrieval instances. The incorrectly retri
of floor plan images. However,

ROBIN hat the proposed framework can han-
does not incorporate rotated images. Hence, we have writ- bounding box. Fig. 6 depicts t



ten a program e ◦ ◦
to rotate th  ROBIN dataset images by ( 1 − 5 ) an- dle varying conditions.



gle in left and right directions. The ROBIN dataset includes 510 im-
ages, and rotating each image by ( ◦

1. − 5◦
) angle in both directions 3.3. Quantitative results

yielded 5100 new images. Hence, the total number of samples are
5100 + 510 = 5610 . We performed our experiments on these im- We have quantified the performance using the standard metric
ages and we call this dataset as REsultant DAtaset (REDA). used for retrieval tasks. Table 1 shows that the proposed frame-

REDA has 3 classes of floor plans, (i) three, (ii) four, and (iii) five
rooms in a given layout. These categories are further divided into
17 sub-categories, each differing in the layout’s global shape. e Table 1

W

have considered of set Comparison of existing
60% images  the ROBIN dataset as a query

techniques on ROBIN.
and extracted similar images from REDA for our experiments. To
justify the proposed framework’s performance,  MAP

we have considered Approach


the same sample query set as of [27] . Experiments were performed RLH + [7] 0.095
over A s ategory BOW + [7] 0.189

RED  which comprise  total 5610 images where each c

contains 1870 samples. For our experiments, from each category, [28] 0.2479


[27] 0.3047
we have considered 1020 (considered 6 different angle of rotation

◦ ◦ ◦ roposed 0.7446
(1◦

, ◦ P
2. , 5 , 355 , 358 , and 359◦

) of each sub-category as query set.

4



R. Khade, K. Jariwala, C. Chattopadhyay et al. Pattern Recognition Letters 145 (2021) 1–7

Fig. 6. Retrieval result for six different queries from the REsultant DAtaset (REDA). Note that the floor plan with red bounding box is incorrectly retrieved as the outer shape
of the retrieved sample is different than the query.

of proposed framework with existing rotation invariant techniques.
From Fig. 7 (a), it is clear that proposed framework edge over
the existing rotation invariant approaches. We have performed a
feature-based analysis of the proposed framework. We have con-
sidered only outer shape-based features (f1), only object-based fea-
tures (f2), outer shape-based then object-based (f1 → f2), object-
based then outer shape-based (f2 → f1), and average of both the
features (avg(f1,f2)). Fig. 7 (b) depicts the f 1 → f 2 edge over other
features. While extracting floor plans from the dataset, the outer
shape should be matched first and then the internal objects, as it
is not mandatory to have the same internal objects arrangements
of one or more floor plans. We have considered this feature to give
more similar recommendations.

Fig. 7. Quantitative comparison of retrieval performance. Here in (b), O1 = f 1 ,
O2 = f 2 , O3 = f 1 → f 2 , O4 = f 2 → f 1 , O5 = a v g( f 1 , f 2) are the features.

3.4. Performance with varying rotation, scale and noise

work outperforms (boldface value) over existing state-of-the-art In this section, we present a fine-grained study of the robust-
(SOA) techniques of rotation sensitive floor plan retrieval on ROBIN ness of the proposed framework with varying degrees of rota-
dataset. As there is no such approach available in the literature tion, scale factor, and in the presence of noise such as average fil-
for rotation of floor plan images, we have compared the perfor- tering and Salt-and-Pepper. To capture the robustness of the ro-
mance with two standard rotation invariant approaches, i.e., SIFT tation variation, we performed one experiment where we have
and HOG. Here we have used the precision-recall metric to com- randomly picked up query samples from all the categories, and

pare the performance. Fig. 7 (a) depicts the comparative analysis rotated them irc
incrementally from 1c to 5circ

in both clock and

5



R. Khade, K. Jariwala, C. Chattopadhyay et al. Pattern Recognition Letters 145 (2021) 1–7

Table 2 4. Conclusion and future scope
Retrieval performance on varying rotation.

Rotation Top 10 Top 30 Top 50 Top 70 Top 100 In this paper we have proposed a framework for multi-oriented



0◦
1.00 floor plan image retrieval. The proposed approach can handle scan-

0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83
1◦
1.00 0.96 0.92 0.89 0.84 time rotations and it is also invariant to scale. The experimental



3◦
1.00 0.94 0.90 0.87 0.82 results show that the proposed framework yields the best retrieval

4◦
1.00 0.96 0.92 0.88 0.83 accuracy over other techniques. However, the system performance

5◦
1.00 0.96 0.92 0.89 0.84

degrades in case of the presence of severe noise. Thereby, for en-
355◦

1.00 0.93 0.90 0.87 0.83
356◦

1.00 0.95 0.91 0.87 0.82 hancing the accuracy of the proposed framework, we can train



357◦
1.00 0.96 0.92 0.89 0.84 deep models or introduce novel descriptors with more specific fea-



358◦
1.00 0.94 0.90 0.87 0.82 tures to automatically annotate the floor plan’s global shape. We

359◦
1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83 are planning to handle this problem in the future.

Declaration of Competing Interest
Table 3
Retrieval performance on varying scale.

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
Scale Top 10 Top 30 Top 50 Top 70 Top 100

cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
0.25 0.97 0.94 0.90 0.87 0.82 influence the work reported in this paper.
0.50 1.00 0.94 0.89 0.86 0.81
0.75 0.99 0.94 0.88 0.84 0.80

Acknowledgement
1.00 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83
1.25 1.00 0.96 0.92 0.89 0.84
1.50 0.99 0.94 0.90 0.86 0.82 This work is partially supported by Science and Engineering Re-
1.75 0.97 0.92 0.88 0.85 0.80 search Board, India under the project id ECR/2016/0 0 0953 .
2.00 0.98 0.91 0.87 0.83 0.79

References

Table 4 [1] S. Ahmed , M. Liwicki , M. Weber , A. Dengel , Improved automatic analysis of
Retrieval performance on varying noise (Average filter). architectural floor plans, in: ICDAR, 2011, pp. 864–869 .

[2] S. Ahmed , M. Liwicki , M. Weber , A. Dengel , Automatic room detection and
Kernel size Top 10 Top 30 Top 50 Top 70 Top 100 room labeling from architectural floor plans, in: DAS, 2012, pp. 339–343 .

0 [3] H. Bay , T. Tuytelaars , L. Van Gool , Surf: speeded up robust features, in: ECCV,
1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83

5 × 5 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83 Springer, 2006, pp. 404–417 .


[4] L. Boominathan , S. Srinivas , R.V. Babu , Compensating for large in-plane rota-
10 × 10 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83

tions in natural images, in: ICVGIP, 2016, pp. 1–8 .
15 × 15 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83

[5] C. Carson , S. Belongie , H. Greenspan , J. Malik , Blobworld: image segmentation
20 × 20 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83 using expectation-maximization and its application to image querying, IEEE

T-PAMI 24 (8) (2002) 1026–1038 .
[6] T. Chakraborti , B. McCane , S. Mills , U. Pal , Loop descriptor: local optimal-ori-

Table 5 ented pattern, IEEE SPL 25 (5) (2018) 635–639 .


Retrieval performance on varying noise (Salt-and-pepper). [7] G. Chechik , U. Shalit , V. Sharma , S. Bengio , An online algorithm for large scale


image similarity learning, in: NIPS, 2009, pp. 306–314 .
Noise Top 10 Top 30 Top 50 Top 70 Top 100 [8] J. Chen , T. Nakashika , T. Takiguchi , Y. Ariki , Content-based image retrieval

using rotation-invariant histograms of oriented gradients, in: ICMR, 2015,
0.003 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83 pp. 4 43–4 46 .
0.004 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83 [9] T. Cohen , M. Welling , Group equivariant convolutional networks, in: ICML,
0.005 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83 2016, pp. 2990–2999 .
0.006 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83 [10] Q.B. Dang , M. Coustaty , M.M. Luqman , J.M. Ogier , C.D. Tran , New spatial-orga-
0.007 1.00 0.95 0.91 0.88 0.83 nization-based scale and rotation invariant features for heterogeneous-content

camera-based document image retrieval, PRL 112 (2018) 153–160 .
[11] J. Gui , P. Li , R2 SDH: robust rotated supervised discrete hashing, in: ACM

SIGKDD, ACM, 2018, pp. 1485–1493 .
[12] L.P. de las Heras , D. Fernández , E. Valveny , J. Lladós , G. Sanchez , Unsupervised

counter-clockwise direction, and performed the retrieval for each wall detector in architectural floor plans, in: ICDAR, 2013, pp. 1245–1249 .
rotated instance. The performance of that experiment is shown in [13] L.P. de las Heras , E. Valveny , G. Sanchez , Combining structural and statisti-



Table cal strategies for unsupervised wall detection in floor plans, in: IWGR, 2013,
3. . The image may be scanned at a high or low resolution

pp. 123–128 .
during the query, resulting in a high (up-scaled) or low (down- [14] L.P. de las Heras , G. Sánchez , And-or graph grammar for architectural floor plan
scaled) resolution query sample. To understand the effect of scal- representation, learning and recognition. a semantic, structural and hierarchi-

ing on the proposed framework’s retrieval performance, we have cal model, in: Iberian Conference on Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis,


2011, pp. 17–24 .
performed some experiments to check the robustness of our ap- [15] L.P. de las Heras , J. Mas , G. Sánchez , E. Valveny , Notation-invariant patch-based
proach. We have taken query samples and scaled (up and down) wall detector in architectural floor plans, in: IWGR, 2011, pp. 79–88 .

then [16] L.P. de las Heras , J. Mas , E. Valveny , et al. , Wall patch-based segmentation in
to a range of { 0 . 25 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 75 , 1 , 1 . 25 , 1 . 5 , 1 . 75 , 2 } . The results

architectural floorplans, in: ICDAR, 2011, pp. 1270–1274 .
of retrieval performance over scale variation is shown in Table 3 ,

[17] L.P. de las Heras , S. Ahmed , M. Liwicki , E. Valveny , G. Sánchez , Statistical seg-
which shows that the proposed technique is also robust to the mentation and structural recognition for floor plan interpretation, IJDAR 17 (3)
variation of (2014) 221–237 .

the scale of the query image.
The document scanning process [18] M. Jaderberg , K. Simonyan , A. Zisserman , Spatial transformer networks, in: Ad-

may not be carried out prop-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015, pp. 2017–2025 .

erly, or the original document may be blurred or contain noise. To [19] J. Kim, W. Jung, H. Kim, J. Lee, CyCNN: a rotation invariant CNN using po-
understand the effect of noise on retrieval, we introduced noise lar mapping and cylindrical convolution layers, arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.



in the query images and noted the proposed performance. 10588 (2020).
The re-

[20] S. Leutenegger , M. Chli , R.Y. Siegwart , BRISK: binary robust invariant scalable
sult of retrieval performance with varying kernel size for a blur- keypoints, in: ICCV, 2011, pp. 2548–2555 .
ring [21] J. Lladós , J. López-Krahe , E. Martí, A system to understand hand-drawn floor

is shown in Table 4 , while Table 5 shows the performance
with increasing level of salt and pepper noise. From the results of plans using subgraph isomorphism and hough transform, MVA 10 (3) (1997)



150–158 .
Tables 2–5 , it is evident that the proposed framework is robust for [22] J. Lladós , G. Sánchez , E. Martí, A string based method to recognize symbols and
large cases of variability. structural textures in architectural plans, in: IWGR, 1997, pp. 91–103 .

6



R. Khade, K. Jariwala, C. Chattopadhyay et al. Pattern Recognition Letters 145 (2021) 1–7

[23] C.W. Niblack , R. Barber , W. Equitz , M.D. Flickner , E.H. Glasman , D. Petkovic , [30] J.R. Smith , S.-F. Chang , Visually searching the web for content, IEEE MM 4 (3)
P. Yanker , C. Faloutsos , G. Taubin , QBIC project: querying images by con- (1997) 12–20 .
tent, using color, texture, and shape, in: Storage and Retrieval for Image and [31] J.R. Smith , S.-F. Chang , VisualSEEk: a fully automated content-based image
Video Databases, 1908, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 1993, query system, in: ACM MM, 1997, pp. 87–98 .
pp. 173–187 . [32] N. Tripathy , T. Chakraborti , M. Nasipuri , U. Pal , A scale and rotation in-

[24] H. Qiu , E.R. Hancock , Graph matching and clustering using spectral partitions, variant scheme for multi-oriented character recognition, in: ICPR, 2016,
PR 39 (1) (2006) 22–34 . pp. 4041–4046 .

[25] K.S. Raghunandan , P. Shivakumara , S. Roy , G.H. Kumar , U. Pal , T. Lu , Multi- [33] J.Z. Wang , J. Li , G. Wiederhold , Simplicity: semantics-sensitive integrated
- script-oriented text detection and recognition in video/scene/born digital im- matching for picture libraries, IEEE T-PAMI 23 (9) (2001) 947–963 .
ages, IEEE T-CSVT 29 (4) (2019) 1145–1162 . [34] L. Zheng , Y. Yang , Q. Tian , Sift meets CNN: a decade survey of instance re-

[26] E. Rublee , V. Rabaud , K. Konolige , G.R. Bradski , ORB: an efficient alternative to trieval, IEEE T-PAMI 40 (5) (2018) 1224–1244 .
SIFT or SURF, in: ICCV, 2011, pp. 2564–2571 . [35] G. Zhi , S. Lo , Z. Fang , A graph-based algorithm for extracting units and loops

[27] D. Sharma , C. Chattopadhyay , High-level feature aggregation for fine-grained from architectural floor plans for a building evacuation model, Comput. Aided
architectural floor plan retrieval, IET Comput. Vis. 12 (5) (2018) 702–709 . Des. 35 (1) (2003) 1–14 .

[28] D. Sharma , C. Chattopadhyay , G. Harit , A unified framework for semantic
matching of architectural floorplans, in: ICPR, 2016, pp. 2422–2427 .

[29] D. Sharma , N. Gupta , C. Chattopadhyay , S. Mehta , DANIEL: a deep architecture
for automatic analysis and retrieval of building floor plans, in: ICDAR, 2017,
pp. 420–425 .

7



International Journal on Document Analysis and Recognition (IJDAR) (2021) 24:19–32
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10032-021-00367-3

ORIG INAL PAPER

Knowledge-driven description synthesis for floor plan interpretation

Shreya Goyal1 · Chiranjoy Chattopadhyay1 · Gaurav Bhatnagar1

Received: 10 January 2020 / Revised: 31 March 2021 / Accepted: 11 April 2021 / Published online: 26 April 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021

Abstract
Image captioning is a widely known problem in the area of AI. Caption generation from floor plan images has applications in
indoor path planning, real estate, and providing architectural solutions. Several methods have been explored in the literature
for generating captions or semi-structured descriptions from floor plan images. Since only the caption is insufficient to capture
fine-grained details, researchers also proposed descriptive paragraphs from images. However, these descriptions have a rigid
structure and lack flexibility, making it difficult to use them in real-time scenarios. This paper offers two models, description
synthesis from image cue (DSIC) and transformer-based description generation (TBDG), for text generation from floor plan
images. These two models take advantage of modern deep neural networks for visual feature extraction and text generation.
The difference between both models is in the way they take input from the floor plan image. The DSICmodel takes only visual
features automatically extracted by a deep neural network, while the TBDG model learns textual captions extracted from
input floor plan images with paragraphs. The specific keywords generated in TBDG and understanding them with paragraphs
make it more robust in a general floor plan image. Experiments were carried out on a large-scale publicly available dataset
and compared with state-of-the-art techniques to show the proposed model’s superiority.

Keywords Floor plan · Captioning · Evaluation · Language modeling

1. Introduction in the literature. The variant of RNN is varied in the decoder
as LSTM, Bi-LSTM, and GRU.

A floor plan is a graphical document that aids architects in Figure 1 depicts the proposed problem with the desired
showing the interior of a building. Floor plan image analysis output. The generated captions in Fig. 1 (second row from
involves semantic segmentation, symbol spotting, and iden- the top) are very structured and contain limited information.
tifying a relationship between them. Describing a floor plan The bottom rowprovidesmore realistic descriptions.We take
in natural language has applications in robotics, real-estate advantage of both image cues and word signals to generate
business, and automation. However, there are several chal- specific and meaningful descriptions. The proposed work is
lenges regarding narrating a graphical document in natural an extension of the paper [16], where a large-scale dataset
language. A graphical document is not similar to a natu- and annotations were proposed. This paper’s proposed work
ral photograph that has an essential feature in every pixel. leverages those annotations by offering multisentence para-
Hence, traditional approaches using image features with tex- graph generation solutions from floor plan images.
tual description fails in this context. The graphical document Figure 2 depicts the overall flow of our proposed method.
requires specific information for their description to make We extend the idea of extracting information from floor plan
it more meaningful. Hence, cues taken directly from an images in a multistaged pipeline using deep learning meth-
image are not very efficient in this context. There are sev- ods. This direction’s previous work is extended by offering
eral approaches available for language modeling and text models that learn textual features with visual features in an
generation in which the encoder–decoder framework is the end-to-end framework. We propose two models, descrip-
most popular choice. In image to text generation, CNN–RNN tion synthesis from image cue (DSIC) and transformer-based
(CNNacting as an encoder, RNNas a decoder) iswidely used description generation (TBDG), where TBDG ismore robust

than DSIC. These two proposed models differ in the way
B Chiranjoy Chattopadhyay the decoder receives the input. In DSIC, region-wise visual

chiranjoy@iitj.ac.in
features are learned with textual features, and a paragraph

1. Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur 342037, India

123



20 S. Goyal et al.

performed in a sequential pipeline using classical machine
learning methods. In [16], the similar visual elements are
learned and classified in part-by-part manner using a deep
neural network. In contrast with the existing approaches, in
this paper, the visual information from floor plan images and
textual features are learned together in an end to end deep
learning framework, and a holistic description for the same
is generated.

1.2 Organization of the paper

The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. Sec-
tion 2 highlights the relatedworks. Sections 3 and 4 describes
the two proposedmodels. Section 5 describes the experimen-
tal setup and the evaluationmetrics followed for performance
analysis. Section 6 discusses the results generated using pro-
posed models. Section 7 describes the comparative analysis

Fig. 1 An illustration of the proposed problem domain with the desired of the various stages involved in description generation mod-
output els and their qualitative and quantitative comparison, while

the paper is concluded in Sect. 8.
description is generated. In contrast, TBDG learns region-
wise captions with region wise features, and those text
features are given as input to the decoder model to create 2 Related work
a paragraph. We further propose a deep learning-based mul-
tistaged pipeline for description generation in order to prove 2.1 Publicly available floor plan datasets
the superiority of end-to-end learning models on multistaged
pipelines. In the literature, the publicly available datasets are ROBIN

[45], CVC-FP [7], SESYD [8], BRIDGE [16], and FPLAN-
1.1. Uniqueness of the proposed work POLY [3]. However, apart from the BRIDGE, the others

contain very few sample images and do not contain annota-
In the previous work, [13–15], only visual elements are tions for objects and their textual descriptions. These datasets
learned and classified in amultistagedmanner using classical were proposed for segmentation, retrieval, and layout anal-
machine learning approaches. Tasks such as semantic seg- ysis, which are not suitable for caption generation and
mentation, room classification, and decor classification are description synthesis tasks. With the advent of deep neural

Fig. 2 An illustration of the proposed work of generating textual description from floor plan images

123



Knowledge-driven description synthesis for floor plan… 21

networks, tasks such as symbol spotting, caption generation, tures by extracting information related to image using
retrieval, semantic segmentation are getting more accurate conventional architectures. Some of the initial works in this
and robust. To meet the requirement of a large number of direction, [11,24,25,33] have used computer vision methods
samples and corresponding annotations, the BRIDGE [16] for extracting attributes from an image and generated sen-
dataset was proposed, having 13000-floor plan images along tences using retrieval and n-gram model.
with annotations. There is high variability in the way decor Johnson et al. [20] proposed an algorithm to generate
symbols have been represented across these datasets. Toover- region-wise captions. The Hierarchical recurrent network
come this limitation, samples from [7,8,45] has been included [22] uses two RNNs to generate paragraphs from an image.
in the BRIDGE dataset, and decor symbol annotations are In [50], two CNN networks are used, where one of them is
done. Hence, a large portion of variable decor symbols has used as an encoder for image features, and the other is used
been covered in BRIDGE dataset. as a decoder for language generation. Similarly, [4] has used

There are many large-scale datasets publicly available in a sentence topic generator network from visual features of
the literature in the context of natural images [23,26], which images, and RNN is used for sentence generation. In [51], the
have many realistic images along with their descriptions or depth aware attention model is used for generating a detailed
captions annotations, region graphs, and other metadata. For paragraph from an image. In [30], latent Dirichlet allocation
example, [23] connects 108,077 images with textual annota- (LDA) is used to mine topics of interest from textual descrip-
tion, 5.4 Million region descriptions, and other annotations tions and developed multiple topic-oriented sentences for
for various tasks such as caption generation, visual ques- image description. In [52], CNN and the RNN framework
tion answering. MS-COCO and MS-COCO captions [5] are were used to capture visual features and generate descrip-
examples of datasets that contain over 330,000 images and tions. Description is also generated from a stream of images
over one and a halfmillion captions (five captions per image). in [34] by using CNN and RNN for a visual feature and

sequence encoding and retrieving sentences from an existing
2.2 Object detection and classification database. A similar line [27] description has been gener-

ated as storytelling from images by using the bi-directional
Researchers have explored handcrafted features and con- attention-based RNN model.
ventional machine learning models [1,9,10,35,49] for the
symbol spotting task in document images. As the deep neu- 2.4 Languagemodeling
ral network models are getting popular, methods like YOLO
[36], Fast-RCNN [12], Faster-RCNN [39] in the context

Nowadays, since deep neural networks are very successful
of natural images were proposed. The YOLO family-based

in natural language processing, learning text for generating
algorithms [36–38] are region classification-based methods,

descriptions using sequence-to-sequence models is a natu-
which is a single neural network trained end-to-end and pre-

ral choice. In the work, [48] has proposed seq2seq learning
dicts bounding boxes and class labels directly. However, all

model for learning and modeling language by LSTMmodel.
the R-CNN family-based models [12,17,18,39], are region

Moreover, [2] and [28] are the initial models which model
proposal-based methods, which extract several regions from

the language by aligning the input sequence with a target
the input image and extract features from those regions using

sequence using attention-based models. The neural machine
CNN and classify them using a classifier. In one of the work

translation model has also been used in text summarization
[54], symbol spotting in floor plans using YOLO and Fast-

tasks such as [41] and [32]. In the next section, the proposed
RCNN has also been explored. In the same line, [40] has

models for description generation from floor plan images are
performed symbol spotting in floor plans using the YOLO

described in detail.
network. Apart from floor plans, symbol spotting or object
detection in document images has been explored by several
researchers. Examples include detecting tables, equations,
figures [43,44,53], signatures, and logos [46,47]. In [21], a 3 Description synthesis from image cue
comparative study of the recognition of symbol spotting on (DSIC)
graphical documents was presented.

We have described the floor plan images in the proposed
2.3 Image description generation model by extracting region-wise visual features from images

and learning paragraphs by providing them to a decoder
Image description generation is a challenging task in AI. network. The region proposal network (RPN) acts as the
Template-based retrieval, n-grams, grammar rules, RNN, encoder, and a hierarchicalRNNstructure acts as the decoder.
LSTM, GRU, are some example approaches to solve the The system is trained in an end to end manner. We describe
problem. These methods work with image modality fea- each step in detail next.

123



22 S. Goyal et al.

3.1 Visual feature extraction

We adopt a hierarchical RNN-based approach as a decoder
framework. Figure 3 depicts a typical architecture of the pro-
posed model. The dataset contains the image (I ) and its
corresponding paragraph description (K ) in the proposed
approach. The CNN is used along with a RPN to generate Fig. 3 Hierarchical RNN to yield paragraph from floor plans
region proposals, R1, R2, . . . , Rn . We extracted the top 5
region proposals for this approach and pooled them in a sin- 3.4 Training
gle pooling vector P using a projection matrix. In DSIC, two
RNNs are used in a hierarchy, where one is used for learning

At this stage, the pooled vectors Pi generated from region
sentence topic vectors from pooled features, and the other is

proposals are taken as input to the sentence-level RNN for
used for learning words for the respective sentence topic vec-

each image I and respective paragraph K . Each input maxi-
tors. In DSIC, the top 5 regions are extracted because there

mum of 5 sentences and 60 words are generated (empirically
are average 5 sentences per paragraph in [16].

identified based upon validation performance). Hence, at
each stage, Sentmax = 5 copies of word RNN and topic vec-

3.2 Region pooling
tor is generated by the sentence RNN for each word RNN
for, Wordmax = 60 timestamps.

All the extracted regions Ri are pooled in a vector P by taking
the projection of each region vector Ri with a projection

Se∑ntmax
matrix M and taking an element wise maximum. Dimension loss(I , K ) = βsent ∗ losssent (Probi , Ki )
of the pooled vector is same as the region vectors and defined i=1
as P = maxni=1 (MRi + bias). Se∑ntmax Wo∑rdmax

The projection matrix is trained end-to-end on the sen- +βword ∗ lossword(Probi j , Ki j )
tence RNN and the word RNN. The pooled vector P , i=1 j=1
compactly represents all the regions Ri s. (1)

3.3 Hierarchical RNN structure Equation 1 is the loss function which is the weighted sum
of cross-entropy losses, losssent and lossword , where losssent

This network, as shown in Fig. 3, contains two units of the is the loss over probability over a sentence topic is genera-
RNN network. One is sentence level (S-RNN) and the other tion (Probi ) and lossword is the loss over probability over
is word level (W-RNN). The S-RNN is single-layered, used words generation (Probi j ), with each respective sentence
for generating a sentence topic vector for each sentence, and topic where K is the paragraph description for each image I .
decides the number of sentences to be generated. W-RNN is The training parameters for DSIC model are such that: Sen-
a two-layered and takes the sentence topic vectors as input tence LSTM has 512 units, word LSTM has 512 units, Fully
and generates words in each sentence. Instead of using sin- connected layer is size 1024. Next, we describe an alternative
gle RNN as a decoder, which would have to regress over to DSIC model, TBDG model where the decoder unit takes
a long sequence of words and make training the language text cues instead of image features/cues as input.
model harder, two RNN networks are taken in a hierarchy.
The choice of networks for both RNNs is kept as LSTM net-
works since they can learn long-term dependencies than a 4 Transformer-based description generation
vanilla RNN. The S-RNN is followed by two-layered fully (TBDG)
connected network, which generates a topic vector to be
given as input to W-RNN after processing the hidden states The TBDG is a transformer-based model for generating
from RNN. The W-RNN takes topic vector and word-level descriptions from floor plan images. It takes input as text
embeddings for the respective sentence as input. A probabil- features by its decoder unit and generates a paragraph-based
ity distribution is generated for each word in the vocabulary, description. In TBDG, RPN learns region-wise captions
where is the threshold, Th is taken as 0.5, which generates available in BRIDGE dataset, instead of multisentenced
further words for each sentence. paragraphs, which makes it different from DSIC model. In

addition, a Bi-LSTM unit acts as an encoder to the LSTM
unit acting as a decoder.

123



Knowledge-driven description synthesis for floor plan… 23

Fig. 4 Framework of the proposed TBDG model of generating paragraph description from input floor plan image

4.1 Paragraph generation with extra knowledge 4.3 Caption fusion and word embedding generation

Descriptions generated directly from image cues in DSIC At this stage,we have n captions generated for each floor plan
lack the floor plan-specific information. There are chances image.We select the top 5 captions with the highest probabil-
to miss out on salient features in the graphical document. ity and fuse them as a paragraph.C1◦C2◦C3◦C4◦C5 = Wi ,
Additional knowledge is required to generate more flexi- whereWi is the fused one-dimensional vector of the extracted
ble and exciting descriptions and accurate data specific to captions and i is the number of training samples. Wi is the
the input image. Hence, the data available is the tuple of concatenation of word embeddings created by word2vec and
(I ,We,K ), where I is the input floor plan image, We is the |We| = min (|W1|, |W2|, |W3|, . . . , |Wi |). Word2vec gener-
word cues extracted from the image, and K is the paragraph ates the embeddings for words, which is a representation of
description about each floor plan. In language modeling and each word as a vector. The dimension of the concatenated
text generation networks, Seq2Seq models are widely used. vector was taken as the minimum of the vectors to avoid the
However, with the advent of attention based seq2seq net- vanishing gradient problem during the back propagation of
works, popularly known as transformers, the performance the network.
of the text generation models has been increased to a great
extent. In TBDG, the corpus K is preprocessed for train- 4.4 Paragraph encoding
ing by removing extra lines, white spaces, unknown symbols
and punctuation, and tokenized using PTB tokenizer [31]. In [16], for each floor plan, a detailed paragraph description
The words which are most frequently occurring are selected, is available. However, some of the paragraphs are too long
and a vocabulary is generated for the words. for encoding and contain additional information. Training the

modelwith too long sequences leads to the vanishing gradient
problem. Considering the dataset’s size, manually selecting

4.2 Region-wise captions useful information from each set of sentences is impossi-
ble. Hence, we heuristically selected a few keywords from

Floor plan images are distinctly different from natural the corpus. Examples of such keywords are common cate-
images, and conventional deep models are inefficient to cre- gories of regions like bedroom, bathroom, kitchen, porch,
ate features depicting a unique floor plan. Hence, learning garage, and other keywords describing objects, like stairs,
region-wise visual features is advantageous in this context. bathtubs, kitchen bars. From the available paragraphs, we
Wehave extracted the region using the region proposalmodel extracted only those sentences which consist of these key-
described inDSIC. The annotations for regions in floor plans, words to shorten the length of each paragraph. Each target
available in [16], are used along with these region proposals sequence (Ti ) is a one-dimensional vector and concatena-
to train an LSTM model. The model generates region-wise tion of the word embeddings generated by word2vec, and,
descriptions/captions, C1,C2, . . . ,Cn as shown in Fig. 4. |Te| = min (|T1|, |T2|, |T3|, . . . , |Ti |) as shown in Fig. 4.
The generated captions are taken as input to the encoder–
decoder unit, which is the next stage of the pipeline, where
these captions serve as extra knowledge to the decoder net-
work.

123



24 S. Goyal et al.

4.5 Encoder–decoder architecture

In TBDG model, we have proposed a transformer archi-
tecture that can handle dependencies between input and
output sequence tokens by giving the decoder the entire input
sequence. It focuses on a certain part of the input sequence
when it predicts the output sequence. As shown in Fig. 4,
the encoded captions We are given as input to the Bi-LSTM
unit which acts as an encoder. The Bi-LSTM unit generates
hidden states (h1, h2, h3, . . . , hn) and given to an atten-
tion mechanism which first generates alignment scores e Fig. 5 An illustration of a floor plan image and its corresponding anno-

i j tations in the BRIDGE dataset [16]
between the current target hidden state ht and source hidden
state hs . The alignment scores are further given to SoftMax
layer, which generates normalized output probabilities for 5.1 Dataset
each word as αi j , (See Eq. 2). Here, ei j are the outputs gen-
erated by the alignment model, where i is the number of time In this paper, we have conducted our experiments on
step. Attention weight αi j is the normalized attention score at BRIDGE [16]. This dataset has a large number of floor plan
each time stamp i for j th hidden state, where n is the number samples and their corresponding metadata. Figure5 shows
of encoded words in the sentence or hidden states. Further the components of [16] which has (a) floor plan image, (b)
context vector cvi is generated at every time step i , which is decor symbol annotation in an XML format, (c) region-wise
a weighted sum of∑encoded feature vectors. Context vector is caption annotations in JSON format, (d) paragraph-based
defined as c n

vi = j=1(αi j hi ). Attention scores learn how descriptions. Each paragraph’s average length in word count
relevant is the input vector to the output vector. In Fig. 4, the is 116, with the average length of each sentence being 5.
word embeddings, We and Te, are given as input and target The count of diversity is 121, a measure of the richness
output vectors to the encoder unit. Equation 2 describes the of words used in sentences. There are 134942 nouns, 5027
calculation of attention scores in the proposed model. verbs, 46379 adjectives, and 5476 proper nouns available in

the dataset.

ei j = align(ht , hs)
exp(e 5.2 Quantitative evaluationmetrics

∑ i j )
αi j = (2)

exp(ein) We have quantitatively evaluated the symbol spotting accu-
racy and text synthesis quality. The performance metrics are

Hence, this way, the decoder learns correspondence defined next.
between input and output sequences in a global context and
generates output sentences Se. Here, the decoder is a LSTM 1. ROUGE: It is a set ofmetrics designed to evaluate the text
networkwith 256 units, connected to a time-distributed dense summaries with a collection of reference summaries.We
layer with SoftMax activation function. Time-distributed have compared the generated descriptions with available
dense layer applies a fully connected (dense) operation on human-written descriptions usingn-gramROUGEbased
every time step. The network parameters used for training on the formula
TBDS model are such that: Optimizer used is Adam, loss
function is categorical cross-entropy, input sequence length is ∑ ∑

S∈{RS} gram−n∈S Countm(gram − n)
80, output sequence length is kept 80, and embedding dimen- ∑ ∑ (3)

m − n)
sions is 150 (empirically determined). S∈{RS} gram−n∈S Count(gra

where RS stands for reference summaries, n stands for
length of the n-gram, gram−n, andCountm(gram−n)

5 Experimental setup is the maximum number of n-grams co-occurring in the
candidate summary and the set of reference summaries.

Here,wediscuss the details of how the experimentswere con- 2. BLEU: It analyzes the co-occurrences of n-gramsbetween
ducted. All the experiments were performed on the dataset amachine translation and a human-written sentence. The
BRIDGE on a system with NVIDIA GPU Quadro P6000, more the matches, the better is the candidate translation
with 24 GB GPU memory, 256 GB RAM. All implementa- is. The score ranges from 0 to 1, where 0 is the worst
tion has been done in Keras with Python. score, and 1 is the perfect match. The n-gram modified

123



Knowledge-driven description synthesis for floor plan… 25

precision score (pn) is computed as: Mean average precision (mAP) is the average of AP
∑ ∑ calculated over all the classes.

pn = C∈{Cand} ∑gram−n∈C Countclip(gram − n)
∑

C ′∈{Cand} gram−n′∈C ′ Count(gram − n′)

Countclip limits the number of times an n-gram to be 6 Results of the proposedmodels
considered in a candidate (Cand) string. Then, they
computer the geometric mean of the modified precision In the next sections, results generated with the proposed

(pn) using n-gram up to length N and weightWn , which
models are described in detail. To validate the superiority

sums up to 1. A brevity penalty (BP) is used for longer of the proposed models DSIC and TBDG, the description

candidate summaries and for spurious words in it, which generation by a multistaged pipeline with deep learning is

is defined by the following equation: also proposed and a comparative analysis is done to validate
the choice of the networks used. In the next sections, steps

{ involved in visual element detection are described in detail.
BP = 1, if c > r

1−r (4) It also discusses the resultant detection and classification of
e c , c ≤ r visual elements in the proposed pipeline.

c is the length of the candidate summary, and r is the 6.1 Decor symbol detection and classification
length of the reference summary. Then, BLEU score for
corpus level given equal weights to all n-grams is eval- Symbol spotting is a widespread problem in document image
uated by the following equation: interpretation. In [16], there are annotations for the decor

∑ symbols. In this work, we have adapted the YOLO model
BLEU = N

BP.exp i=1 Wnlog(pn) (5) [37] for detecting and classifying the decors by fine-tuning it
using the decor symbol annotations present in the BRIDGE

Here, Wn is the equally distributed weight in n-grams. dataset. The symbol spotting network has nine convolutional
For example, in case of BLEU-4, the weights used are layers with max-pool layers in between and is fine-tuned
{(0.25), (0.25), (0.25), (0.25)}. for 16 object categories (as shown in Fig. 6). The trained

3. METEOR: It is a metric used for evaluating machine- network has 105 filters (for BRIDGE dataset) and a linear
generated summaries against human-written summaries
by checking the goodness of the order of words in both.
METEOR score combines precision, recall, and frag-
mentation (alignment) in the sentences. It is a harmonic
mean of the uni-gram precision and uni-gram recall
given alignment and calculated as:

( )
no of chunks

PN = 1
2. matched uni − (6)

grams

MET EOR = 10PR
1. −

R + ( PN ) (7)
9P

Fig. 6 Object classes available in BRIDGE dataset [16]
PN is the penalty imposed based on a larger number of
chunks, P are the uni-gram precision, R is the uni-gram
recall. METEOR is the final score obtained by mul-
tiplying the harmonic mean of unigram precision and
uni-gram recall with the penalty imposed.

4. Average Precision (AP): The metric average precision
used for evaluating the performance of decor symbol
detection method is defined by the following equation:

∑
AP = 1 ∗ Pr (rec) (8)

Ns

where Ns is the total detection for each class of symbol, Fig. 7 Qualitative result of the spotted decor symbols in two floor plan
Pr is the precision value as a function of recall(rec). images

123



26 S. Goyal et al.

Fig. 8 A visualization of the image classification network with top-6 activation maps from each layers

activation function. The predicted class confidence score is gram of the model and visualization of the network output
calculated as Prob(object) × I oU . Here, I oU is the inter- for a class image “Bedroom.” In this network, only the last
section of union between the predicted bounding box and 5 layers are kept trainable in VGG19 and appended with
the ground truth bounding box. It is calculated as I oU = two dense and dropout (0.5) layers. Figure 8 depicts that the
Area of I ntersection

Area of Union . At the same time, Prob(object) is the activations for the initial layers retain almost the entire infor-
probability of detecting the object in that bounding box. mation from the image, focusing on specific parts such as
The decor symbols detected here (oi ), are used in generat- edges and the image’s background. However, in the deeper
ing semi-structured descriptions in the later stage. The decor layers, activations are less visually interpretable. The char-
symbols in floor plans can vary widely because of the rep- acterized rooms(r) from an input floor plan image are stored
resentation across different datasets. Also, in the real-world as (r1, r2, . . . , rn). Figure9 shows the resultant classification
floor plans made by architects, the model might differ. We for floor plan image room classification framework into f ive
introduced variability by including samples of floor plans defined classes. The empty spaces in the floor plan are not
from different datasets such as [7,8,45] for decor symbol marked as any room class in the BRIDGE dataset, hence they
annotations. The training dataset covers awide range of decor are not classified by the model. VGG19 pretrained on Ima-
symbols, making the network detect and recognize the sym- geNet dataset is fine-tuned with a 1920 training sample of 5
bols’ variability. The detected decor symbols in floor plan room classes, and validation is done over 460 samples. The
images are shown in Fig. 7. The two images are taken from training data contains a mixed sample of room images from
BRIDGE datasets and show the variability in decor sym- [7,16,45]. The rooms ri , generated here are used in generat-
bols for two different floor plan images. Wide variability in ingmultistaged descriptions in the later stage. The number of
decor symbols is included in the training dataset to make the samples for each class in the training and validation dataset
detection model more general. The symbols which are not are: Bedroom: 440 and 86, Bathroom: 887 and 223, Kitchen:
detected, for example, “billiard” and “cooking range,” are 287 and 72,Hall: 75 and 21, Living Room: 231 and 58 in the
not included in symbol annotations. respective order.

6.2 Room characterization 6.3 Description generation

Room characterization is a step to recognize and classify In the previous sections, different visual elements from the
individual rooms in a floor plan to their respective class. In floor plan are detected and classifiedusingvarious deep learn-
this regard, rooms in each floor plan are classified into f ive ingmodels. In themultistaged pipeline, these visual elements
classes, Bedroom, Bathroom, Kitchen, Hall, Living room. are used for a semi-structured sentence model proposed in
Annotations for each room class are taken from BRIDGE [14], [13], and a description for the given floor plan is gen-
dataset, where region bounding boxes are available and class erated. Figure 10 depicts an example where the synthesized
names are taken from the region-wise captions for the respec- descriptions for a given floor plan image with the visual ele-
tive bounding box. A deep learning image classification ments described in the previous steps. Figure 11 shows the
model using VGG19 as a backbone network is used as a results generated by the proposed models, TBDG, DSIC,
classification framework. Figure 8depicts the frameworkdia- semi-structured sentence-based model, and other baseline

123



Knowledge-driven description synthesis for floor plan… 27

with the end-to-end models, DSIC and TBDG. Multistaged
pipelines have been used in the literature for floor plan recog-
nition anddescription generation in [13–15,29]. Inmultistage
pipelines, the accuracy of the generated descriptions depends
upon the accuracy of the intermediate stages. Hence, mis-
classification of one component will lead to error in the
output sentence. This rationale is the driving factor to come
up with an end-to-end learning model with advanced deep
neural networks. In the next sections, comparative analysis
for various modules and sub-modules are discussed in detail,
along with the qualitative and quantitative evaluation of gen-
erated descriptions.

Fig. 9 Qualitative result of room classification for f ive classes on two
different floor plan images

7 Comparative analysis with state of the art

In this section, a qualitative and quantitative comparative
analysis with various state-of-the-art schemes are presented
based on the metrics discussed in Sect. 5.2.

7.1 Comparative analysis of multistaged pipeline

In this sub-section, we present how the various stages of the
proposed multistaged pipeline have performed.

7.1.1 Decor identification

Figure 12 depicts a comparative analysis of YOLO and
Fig. 10 An illustration of semi-structured description generation from F-RCNN models trained on BRIDGE dataset. The mAP
floor plan images

obtained for decor symbol spotting network using YOLO
is 82.06% and for F-RCNN is 75.25%. For a few categories

models. In this paper, a comparison of semi-structured sen- of symbols, F-RCNN is performing better, but the overall
tences with learned sentences is presented to demonstrate the mAP is ∼ 7% higher for YOLO. Hence, YOLO is used in
superiority of end-to-end learning models with multistaged the model instead of faster-RCNN given the better perfor-
pipelines.Multistaged pipeline for floor plan recognition and mance. Furthermore in the work [40], symbol spotting from
description generation is presented here as a comparison architectural images is done for occluded and cluttered plans

Fig. 11 Descriptions generated with proposed models and various baseline models

123



28 S. Goyal et al.

cross-validation over the data samples was performed on
training data to validate the model.

The room image classification model discussed in Sect.
6.2, was also implemented using much recent Capsule net-
work [42] as a backbone network, which gave a classification
accuracy of 56.01%, making VGG19 the obvious choice for
the backbone network. Figure13b is the training and val-
idation accuracy for the room classification model using
Capsule network. The performance of the room character-
ization on BRIDGE dataset was also tested with classical
machine learning methods proposed in [13,14]. BoD classi-
fier with multilayered perceptron, proposed in [14], gave a

Fig. 12 A comparison of YOLO and Faster-RCNN models for decor validation accuracy of 61.30% and LOFD proposed in [13]
identification withmultilayered perceptron gave 63.75%of accuracy,while

the validation accuracy of the proposed model is 82.98%,
making VGG19 a suitable choice for room classification
model. In Fig. 9, the two images have variability in the rep-
resentation of each room class; however, the features leared
using CNNs are much robust in the case of variable represen-
tation of images of the same class compared to handcrafted
features, leading to higher validation accuracy.

Fig. 13 Performance evaluation of room classification 7.2 Quantitative evaluation of description
generation

using YOLO, concluding the fact that YOLO as a single
In this sub-section, we present the quantitative evaluation of

shot detector performs better than two-stage classification
our proposed model with other state-of-the-art. The baseline

networks such as faster-RCNN for architectural drawings.
descriptions are generated using language modeling where
models such as LSTM [19], Bi-LSTM [19] and GRU [6]

7.1.2 Room characterization are experimented with. Language modeling is done by learn-
ing an entire corpus. These paragraph corpus are the textual

Figure13a, b depicts the performance of image cues/ visual descriptions for floor plans [16]. The generated descrip-
elements extraction from floor plan images for room classifi- tions from the proposed models and presented baselines are
cation. Figure13a is the training and validation accuracy and compared on various matrices defined in Sect. 5.2, and the
loss curves for the room image classification using VGG19 quantitative results are presented in Table 1.
backbone network. After training for 50 epochs, an accuracy Figure14a shows the loss curve for TBDG for the part
of 82.98% could be achieved in-room image classification. of language learning (Sequence2Sequence training, LSTM
The fluctuation of validation loss is due to the uneven distri- as encoder, Bi-LSTM as decoder), Figure14b shows the
bution of the number of images in all f ive classes. A fivefold loss curve for DSIC for the language learning part (CNN

Table 1 Evaluation of generated paragraphs with different metrices (METEOR, BLEU, ROUGE)

Method BLEU-1 BLEU-2 BLEU-3 BLEU-4 METEOR ROUGEL
precision recall f-score

Densecap-concat 0.1353 0.0586 0.0955 0.2373 0.0530 0.9416 0.3322 0.4910
Semi-Structured 0.1519 0.1613 0.1622 0.432 0.0677 0.9215 0.3410 0.4977
DSIC 0.7013 0.6794 0.6637 0.6543 0.4460 1.4797 1.0593 1.2346
LSTM 0.4464 0.3048 0.2166 0.1673 0.2076 0.7648 0.6063 0.6763
Bi-LSTM 0.4629 0.3058 0.2275 0.1699 0.2281 0.6852 0.6880 0.6865
GRU 0.4487 0.3019 0.2194 0.1691 0.1825 0.6261 0.6892 0.6561
TBDG 0.7277 0.6866 0.6633 0.6326 0.4927 1.5283 1.1142 1.2867

123



Knowledge-driven description synthesis for floor plan… 29

image-specific sentences. These language models generate
phrases and context used in the training corpus while gen-
erating sentences when we use a seed sentence to create
a paragraph, which increases the BLEU scores for differ-
ent n-grams. ROUGEL also gives the highest precision,
recall and f-score values for the TBDG model. Hence, it can
be concluded that the knowledge-driven description gener-
ation (TBDG) performs better than generating descriptions
directly from image cues (visual features). Other language

Fig. 14 Performance evaluation for TBDG & DSIC models models generate sentences using corpus phrases but not spe-
cific to the input image, which is not very useful in the current
scenario. The qualitative evaluation and comparison of the
proposedmodelswith the baselinemodels are discussed next.

7.3 Qualitative evaluation of description generation

All the paragraph descriptions generated by various tech-
niques are shown in Fig. 16, which are corresponding to the

Fig. 15 A comparison of loss curves of language models images shown in the respective sets of descriptions.
Results show that paragraphs generated by [13] and [20]

are simple and have a fixed structure and they do not have
as encoder, hierarchical RNN as decoder). In TBDG, since flexibility. They do not describe the connection of a room
LSTM and Bi-LSTM layers are used for training on word with another in a global context. However, paragraphs gen-
features, in the network, the loss converged below 1 and erated fromDSICandTBDGare very descriptive and close to
became stable in 51 epochs. In DSIC, training LSTM based human written sentences. They also include specific details
hierarchical RNN with image features took a longer epoch of the images, for example, details about the contents of a
time to converge than TBDG because of the larger number bedroom, such as closets and bathrooms, details about the
of trainable parameters. Figure15a–c shows the loss curves staircase in a hall. They also include details about other
for the baseline languagemodels for languagemodeling, i.e., areas in the floor plan, for example, porches and garage,
LSTM,Bi-LSTMandGRUmodels, respectively.As it can be which multistage-based methods fail to describe because
seen that the loss value reached below 1 but did not become they do not have these room classes included in their training
0 while training for 20 epochs. Additionally, GRU has sim- data. Thesemodels themselves capture intricate details in the
ilar benefits, but they are more efficient than LSTMs when descriptions, in which multistage-based methods fail, since
training with more data is required. In this case, LSTM and they require explicit annotation for every component. More-
Bi-LSTM took ∼ 550 ms/epoch, while GRU took ∼ 300 over, paragraphs generated from other baselines, LSTM,
ms/epoch. The loss value in GRU got stabilized earlier than Bi-LSTM, GRU language models, are generating phrases
LSTMs while trained for 50 epochs. and words related to the language structure but possess very

Table 1 shows the quantitative comparison of the descrip- less relevance to the input image. Hence, these kinds of mod-
tion synthesis with the proposed models and the presented els are suitable for poetry, story, and abstract generation but
baseline models for various metrics with the ground truth not for image to paragraph generation.
paragraphs available in [16] where the values in bold Figure17 shows the failed prediction of paragraph for the
represents the highest value of a particular metric for a proposed model TBDG.
given model. The evaluation is done on BLEU-{1, 2, 3, 4}, Sometimes the model fails to generate longer sequences
ROUGEL , and METEOR, where the BLEU score vari- or the words which are less frequent in the vocabulary, and
ant depends upon the n-gram. It can be seen that the then it starts repeating the sentences. Figure18 shows the fail-
performance of TBDG is better than all other description ure case specific to DSIC and the requirement of the TBDG
generation schemes on all the metrics except for BLEU- model for the input floor plan image. However, DSIC yielded
3, 4. It is least in semi-structured template-basedmethod, and descriptions with details related to the plan but not rele-
Densecap-concatenated paragraphs (taking top 5 sentences vant to the current image. Hence, with TBDG, the generated
from Densecap model trained on floor plans) since the sen- sentences describe the details of bedrooms and bathrooms,
tences have a fixed structure given different input images. taking cues from the words. Hence, it validates the robust-
However, the performance increases for the language mod- ness of the TBDG model over DSIC for a general floor plan
els, LSTM, Bi-LSTM, and GRU even if they do not generate image.

123



30 S. Goyal et al.

Fig. 16 Descriptions generated with proposed models and various baseline models

Fig. 17 An illustration of a failure case with the TBDG model Fig. 18 An illustration depicting the robustness of the TBDG model
over DSIC for an unknown sample

8 Conclusion
perform well for floor plan images. Therefore, we proposed

In this work, we proposed two models, DSIC and TBDG for a transformer-based image to paragraph generation scheme
generating textual descriptions for floor plan images, which (TBDG), which takes both image and word cues to create
are graphical documents depicting a blueprint of a building. a paragraph. We also proposed a hierarchical recurrent neu-
However, being a 2D line drawing images with binary pixel ral network-based model (DSIC) to generate descriptions by
valuesmakes them different from natural images. Hence, due directly learning features from the image,which lacks robust-
to the lack of information at every pixel, various state-of-the- ness in the case of a general floor plan image. We evaluated
art description generation methods for natural images do not the proposed model on different metrics by presenting sev-

123



Knowledge-driven description synthesis for floor plan… 31

eral baselines language models for description generation 18. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Spatial pyramid pooling in
and proposing a deep learning based multistaged pipeline to deep convolutional networks for visual recognition. T-PAMI 37(9),

generate descriptions from floor plan images.We trained and 1904–1916 (2015)
19. Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J.: Long short-term memory. Neural

tested the proposed models and baselines on the BRIDGE Comput. 9(8), 1735–1780 (1997)
dataset, which contains large-scale floor plan images and 20. Johnson, J., Karpathy, A., Fei-Fei, L.: Densecap: fully convolu-
annotations for various tasks. In future work, these models tional localization networks for dense captioning. In: CVPR (2016)

will be made more generalized to generate descriptions for 21. Khan, I., Islam, N., Rehman, H.U., Khan, M.: A comparative study
of graphic symbol recognition methods. Multimedia Tools Appl.

widely variable floor plan images by improving the network 79(13), 8695–8725 (2020)
architecture and redesigning themethod of taking word cues. 22. Krause, J., Johnson, J., Krishna, R., Fei-Fei, L.: A hierarchical

approach for generating descriptive image paragraphs. In: CVPR
Acknowledgements Funding was provided by Science and Engineer- (2017)
ing Research Board (ECR/2016/000953). 23. Krishna, R., Zhu, Y., Groth, O., Johnson, J., Hata, K., Kravitz, J.,

Chen, S., Kalantidis, Y., Li, L.J., Shamma, D.A., et al.: Visual
genome: connecting language and vision using crowdsourced
dense image annotations. IJCV 123(1), 32–73 (2017)

24. Kulkarni, G., Premraj, V., Ordonez, V., Dhar, S., Li, S., Choi, Y.,
References Berg, A.C., Berg, T.L.: Babytalk: understanding and generating

simple image descriptions. T-PAMI 35(12), 2891–2903 (2013)
1. Adam, S., Ogier, J.M., Cariou, C., Mullot, R., Labiche, J., Gardes, 25. Li, S., Kulkarni, G., Berg, T.L., Berg, A.C., Choi, Y.: Composing

J.: Symbol and character recognition: application to engineering simple image descriptions using web-scale n-grams. In: CoNLL
drawings. IJDAR 3(2), 89–101 (2000) (2011)

2. Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., Bengio, Y.: Neural machine transla- 26. Lin, T.Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan,
tion by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint D., Dollár, P., Zitnick, C.L.: Microsoft COCO: common objects in
arXiv:1409.0473 (2014) context. In: ECCV (2014)

3. Barducci, A., Marinai, S.: Object recognition in floor plans by 27. Liu, Y., Fu, J., Mei, T., Chen, C.W.: Let your photos talk: Generat-
graphs of white connected components. In: ICPR (2012) ing narrative paragraph for photo stream via bidirectional attention

4. Chatterjee, M., Schwing, A.G.: Diverse and coherent paragraph recurrent neural networks. In: AAAI (2017)
generation from images. In: ECCV (2018) 28. Luong, M.T., Pham, H., Manning, C.D.: Effective approaches

5. Chen, X., Fang, H., Lin, T.Y., Vedantam, R., Gupta, S., Dollár, to attention-based neural machine translation. arXiv preprint
P., Zitnick, C.L.: Microsoft COCO captions: data collection and arXiv:1508.04025 (2015)
evaluation server. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.00325 (2015) 29. Madugalla, A., Marriott, K., Marinai, S., Capobianco, S., Goncu,

6. Cho, K., Van Merriënboer, B., Bahdanau, D., Bengio, Y.: On C.: Creating accessible online floor plans for visually impaired
the properties of neural machine translation: encoder-decoder readers. ACM T-ACCESS 13(4), 1–37 (2020)
approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1259 (2014) 30. Mao, Y., Zhou, C., Wang, X., Li, R.: Show and tell more: topic-

7. de las Heras, L.P., Terrades, O.R., Robles, S., Sánchez, G.: CVC- oriented multi-sentence image captioning. In: IJCAI (2018)
FP and SGT: a new database for structural floor plan analysis and 31. Marcus, M., Santorini, B., Marcinkiewicz, M.A.: Building a large
its groundtruthing tool. IJDAR 18(1), 15–30 (2015) annotated corpus of English: The Penn Treebank (1993)

8. Delalandre, M., Valveny, E., Pridmore, T., Karatzas, D.: Genera- 32. Nallapati, R., Zhou, B., Gulcehre, C., Xiang, B., et al.: Abstrac-
tion of synthetic documents for performance evaluation of symbol tive text summarization using sequence-to-sequence RNNs and
recognition & spotting systems. IJDAR 13(3), 187–207 (2010) beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.06023 (2016)

9. Dutta, A., Llados, J., Pal, U.: Symbol spotting in line drawings 33. Ordonez, V., Kulkarni, G., Berg, T.L.: Im2Text: describing images
through graph paths hashing. In: ICDAR (2011) using 1 million captioned photographs. In: NIPS (2011)

10. Dutta, A., Lladós, J., Pal, U.: A symbol spotting approach in graph- 34. Park, C.C., Kim, G.: Expressing an image stream with a sequence
ical documents by hashing serialized graphs. Pattern Recognit. of natural sentences. In: NIPS (2015)
46(3), 752–768 (2013) 35. Qureshi, R.J., Ramel, J.Y., Barret, D., Cardot, H.: Spotting sym-

11. Farhadi, A., Hejrati, M., Sadeghi, M.A., Young, P., Rashtchian, C., bols in line drawing images using graph representations. In: GREC
Hockenmaier, J., Forsyth, D.: Every picture tells a story: generating (2007)
sentences from images. In: ECCV (2010) 36. Redmon, J., Divvala, S., Girshick, R., Farhadi, A.: You only look

12. Girshick, R.: Fast R-CNN. In: ICCV (2015) once: unified, real-time object detection. In: CVPR (2016)
13. Goyal, S., Bhavsar, S., Patel, S., Chattopadhyay, C., Bhatnagar, 37. Redmon, J., Farhadi, A.: YOLO9000: better, faster, stronger. In:

G.: SUGAMAN: describing floor plans for visually impaired by CVPR (2017)
annotation learning and proximity-based grammar. Image Process. 38. Redmon, J., Farhadi, A.: YOLOv3: an incremental improvement.
13(13), 2623–2635 (2019) arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767 (2018)

14. Goyal, S., Chattopadhyay, C., Bhatnagar, G.: ASYSST: a frame- 39. Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., Sun, J.: Faster R-CNN: towards
work for synopsis synthesis empowering visually impaired. In: real-time object detection with region proposal networks. In: NIPS
MAHCI (2018) (2015)

15. Goyal, S., Chattopadhyay, C., Bhatnagar, G.: Plan2Text: a frame- 40. Rezvanifar, A., Cote, M., Branzan Albu, A.: Symbol spotting on
work for describing building floor plan images from first person digital architectural floor plans using a deep learning-based frame-
perspective. In: CSPA (2018) work. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF CVPR Workshops, pp.

16. Goyal, S., Mistry, V., Chattopadhyay, C., Bhatnagar, G.: BRIDGE: 568–569 (2020)
building plan repository for image description generation, and eval- 41. Rush, A.M., Chopra, S., Weston, J.: A neural attention
uation. In: ICDAR (2019) model for abstractive sentence summarization. arXiv preprint

17. He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollár, P., Girshick, R.: Mask R-CNN. In: arXiv:1509.00685 (2015)
ICCV (2017)

123



32 S. Goyal et al.

42. Sabour, S., Frosst, N., Hinton, G.E.: Dynamic routing between 50. Wang, Q., Chan, A.B.: CNN+CNN: convolutional decoders for
capsules. In: Advances in neural information processing systems, image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09019 (2018)
pp. 3856–3866 (2017) 51. Wang, Z., Luo, Y., Li, Y., Huang, Z., Yin, H.: Look Deeper See

43. Saha, R., Mondal, A., Jawahar, C.: Graphical Object Detection in Richer: Depth-aware Image Paragraph Captioning. In: ACM MM
Document Images. In: ICDAR (2019) (2018)

44. Schreiber, S., Agne, S.,Wolf, I., Dengel, A., Ahmed, S.: Deepdesrt: 52. Yao, T., Pan, Y., Li, Y., Qiu, Z., Mei, T.: Boosting image captioning
deep learning for detection and structure recognition of tables in with attributes. In: ICCV (2017)
document images. In: ICDAR (2017) 53. Yi, X., Gao, L., Liao, Y., Zhang, X., Liu, R., Jiang, Z.: CNN based

45. Sharma, D., Gupta, N., Chattopadhyay, C., Mehta, S.: DANIEL: A page object detection in document images. In: ICDAR (2017)
deep architecture for automatic analysis and retrieval of building 54. Ziran, Z., Marinai, S.: Object detection in floor plan images. In:
floor plans. In: ICDAR (2017) IAPR Workshop on Artificial Neural Networks in Pattern Recog-

46. Sharma, N.,Mandal, R., Sharma, R., Pal, U., Blumenstein,M.: Sig- nition (2018)
nature and Logo Detection using Deep CNN for Document Image
Retrieval. In: ICFHR (2018)

47. Su, H., Gong, S., Zhu, X.: Scalable logo detection by self co- Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
learning. Pattern Recognition 97, 107003 (2020) dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

48. Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., Le, Q.: Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks. NIPS (2014)

49. Viola, P., Jones,M.: Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade
of simple features. In: CVPR (2001)

123



Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Remote Sensing Applications: Society and

Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rsase

E2AlertNet: An explainable, efficient, and lightweight model for
emergency alert from aerial imagery
Nandini Saini a, Chiranjoy Chattopadhyay b, *, Debasis Das a
a Indian Institute of Technology, NH 62, Surpura Bypass Rd, Karwar, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
b FLAME School of Computation and Data Science, FLAME Univeristy, Pune, Maharastra, India

A R T I C L E  I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Deep learning-based algorithms have shown significant state-of-the-art accuracy in aerial image
Explainable AI classification. Besides, the nature of these algorithms is a black box, which puts the question of
Aerial image classification why a particular output is produced. Therefore explainability is one kind of solution to improve
Convolutional neural network the transparency of DNN network's decision. In this paper, we have designed a lightweight and
SHAP
LIME explainable convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture for emergency monitoring from

aerial imagery. We interpret the outcomes of the proposed architecture with a newly designed ex-
plainable algorithm which is the improved version of the model-agnostic methods such as Shap-
ley additive explanations (SHAP) and local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME).
We have used a dedicated dataset named as Aerial Image Database for Emergency Response
(AIDER) for the experiments and explained the decisions of the proposed CNN classifier to ensure
reliability. The proposed classifier achieves 96% accuracy with minimal memory requirements
on a benchmark set with known ground truth and explains their outcomes with the newly pro-
posed explainable algorithm.

Credit author statement
Nandini Saini, Chiranjoy Chattopadhyay, Debasis Das.
Nandini Saini: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Software, Writing- Original draft preparation.
Chiranjoy Chattopadhyay: Supervision, Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Writing- Reviewing and Editing.
Debasis Das: Conceptualization, Supervision, Methodology, Writing- Reviewing and Editing.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, scientific research on aerial imagery has gained considerable interest for various practical applications,

such as air-sea rescue operations (Mishra et al. (2020)), crowd counting (Castellano et al. (2020)), traffic monitoring (Kyrkou et al.
(2018)), surveillance (Dang-Ngoc and Nguyen-Trung (2019)). Recent technological advances viz artificial intelligence and deep
learning allow new applications, including recognizing and monitoring active and passive incidents where the reachability of humans
is at risk (e.g., fire detection in the forest, landslide area, and flood area recognition) (Al-Kaff et al. (2018)). The research work for
these applications through natural images or known as the ground level image, is not new, but it is acquiring significant attention in
aerial images. The aerial image differs from the natural image in terms of massive scale variations, the orientation of the objects, and
non-uniform dense distributions. The Fig. 1 shows the example of natural images for the case of some emergency situations; those are

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: chiranjoy.chattopadhyay@flame.edu.in (C. Chattopadhyay).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rsase.2022.100896
Received 21 July 2022; Received in revised form 31 October 2022; Accepted 4 December 2022
Available online 16 December 2022
2352-9385/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.



N. Saini et al. Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

Fig. 1. Some examples of natural images and aerial images.

taken from the google images and aerial images, which are taken from the AIDR dataset. In the Fig. 1, we can observe that the natural
images capture the profile information of the objects, whereas aerial image captures the roof information of the objects. The aerial im-
age also differs from the natural image in terms of massive scale variations, the orientation of the ob-jects, and non-uniform dense dis-
tributions which makes aerial images more challenging compare to natural images.

Currently, deep convolutional neural network-based methods have attained noteworthy performance in retrieving semantic infor-
mation through aerial imagery in emergency monitoring and disaster management applications (Kyrkou and Theocharides (2019);
Akshya and Priyadarsini (2019); Gebrehiwot et al. (2019)). These multi-layered networks contain a predefined structure with layers
of neurons, and neurons are trained based on the dataset with given labels. Despite all the popularity and supremacy in terms of the
accuracy of deep learning, it is still difficult to visualize their black-box architectures. However, designers have knowledge of the
dataset, loss functions, and other hyperparameters for the training but restrict understanding of the learned model. Hence for model
deployment in real-life situations such as emergency monitoring and criminal justice, where the final decisions may have severe out-
comes has required a significant amount of trust about the model by knowing the thought process of model in prediction. Therefore,
Explainable AI (Samek et al. (2019)) enlightens the hidden inside of the deep learning model by providing a human-understandable
visual explanation of the predicted results and building trust in their decisions in critical applications. The standard criterion for mea-
suring the deep learning model's training process is accuracy or loss of the validation data. But in the case of critical applications mak-
ing the decision based on this criterion is insufficient. Hence developing a reliable emergency monitoring system is required to have
accuracy and explainability for their decisions.

The main contribution of this study is as follows:
• A weighted dilation convolution network, E2AlertNet that bundle the information from a larger receptive field of aerial imagery

to provide state-of-the-art accuracy.
• An efficient, explainable algorithm that build trust in the model's decisions with 96% accuracy as well as 32% reduction in model

size.
• Extensive empirical study on Aerial Image Database for Emergency Response (AIDER) dataset, and comparison with different

state-of- the-art methods.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related work, which includes the current deep learning-

based methods study and the role of explainability. Section 3 presents the network architecture and explanations methods with the
modified explainable algorithm. The experiment setup, dataset, and results are explained in section 4. Finally section 6 concludes the
paper.

2. Related work
Researchers have explored various deep learning based methods for the aerial image classification. Currently literature is empha-

sizing on the explainablity of these black box deep learning models. In this section, we discuss about the existing research in these
fields.
2.1. Deep learning for aerial image

Over the years, the success of deep learning for different tasks of natural image such as object detection, image segmentation,
scene classification has provided the research scope in the aerial image. A variety of deep learning-based approaches have been pro-
posed for aerial image classification of emergency response, such as fire detection Shamsoshoara et al. (2021), flood detection
Rahnemoonfar et al. (2021), change detection. From the literature analysis, majorly existing approaches have used pre-trained net-
works Maggiori et al. (2016); Bejiga et al. (2017) viz VGG16, ResNet50 with transfer learning and achieve accuracy between 72% -
90%. These models have trained on the existing datasets, those are created in two ways for emergency monitoring through aerial im-

2



N. Saini et al. Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

ages. One is scraped-based images, and another one is apparatus-based images. The scraped-based images are collected from different
web sources, including Google image search engine, Open images dataset, social platforms. On the other hand, apparatus-based im-
ages are collected from different satellites, drones, or other aerial imagery equipment. Each dataset is challenging with various as-
pects in terms of resolution, con-text information, lack of consistency, generalisation ability. Mostly these datasets are covering one or
two disasters events such as FLAME dataset Shamsoshoara et al. (2021) for fire classification, SpaceNet Van Etten et al. (2018) and
DeepGlobe Demir et al. (2018) for detection of collapsed build-ing etc. Hence finalizing the data according to image analysis task so
that DL model provides the high accuracy on the unseen data, itself is tough. The authors Shamsoshoara et al. (2021) have used deep
learning model with transfer learning, ensembled CNN networks for classify the fire with the combination of visual features such as
smoke, flame. In Gharaee et al. (2021), graph attention network based method proposed for the road type classification problem
which can help to distinguish the features of flooded road or empty road.

Similarly, the work in Zheng et al. (2022) targets the change detection in building through aerial image using high frequency at-
tention Siamese network which acquire a better feature representation from high resolution images to provide best performance. In
Fadaeddini et al. (2018) a deep residual neural network is proposed for low altitude aerial image classification. In Martins et al.
(2020), authors designed the multi-scale object-based CNN for high resolution of aerial image classification. Similarly, in Kyrkou and
Theocharides (2020) authors propose a deep learning approach for disaster management with UAVs. Although many deep convolu-
tion based approaches have achieved promising results by proposing full training using aerial image datasets but they are focusing
one or two objectives such as only fire detection, change detection etc. The authors in Nogueira et al. (2017) have explored the gener-
alization power of convolutional neural network with three strategies such as full training, fine tuning and feature extractors for aer-
ial image scene classification task.

In general, deep learning model has capability to learn the semantic features from complex distribution from the image. These
models extract and learn the local features and show the invariant property to small translation or distortions in the input image
which increase it generalization capacity. Due to complex settings of network, large number of parameters and black box nature,
these factors at times limits the thorough understanding of the deep model and explainability. Also most of the existing work have fo-
cused one or two objectives for monitoring emergency cases. Hence our study has motivated from these limitations and proposed a
method which provide solutions for these issues.
2.2. Explainability on deep learning models

In recent years, explanations of these deep neural network methods provide additional insight into their decision process Selvaraju
et al. (2017). Such studies can be mainly categorized into two parts. The first part is re-lated to model-specific methods Bach et al.
(2015) based on generating visual feature explanations using gradient saliency, integrated gradients, attention, etc. The other part in-
cludes model agnostic methods Chen (2021); Ribeiro et al. (2016) that work on all models or model-independent such as SHAP, Per-
turbation Based, LIME, etc. The comparative study of XAI algorithms such as SHAP and LIME is summarized in the Table 1:

Most of the literature focuses on to the improve accuracy with deep neural network. However, their methods provide decisions
that solely depend on the learned network's accuracy. Therefore, apart from working only on aerial image classification model's accu-
racy, we have also emphasized the other per-formance parameter which is explanation of model's outcome so that model will not rely
on single performance parameter for taking the decision in emergency situation. Additionally, the existing approaches have shown re-
ally good results of accuracy using deep neural network but such methods suffer from higher number of parameters, complex compu-
tation which require a costly system to deploy the model in real life applications. Hence to focus these limitations of existing ap-
proaches, we have also introduced the method with the minimum parameters.

3. Methodology
In this section 3.1, we discuss the proposed E2AlertNet architecture for aerial image classification in the emergency cases. We have

also proposed the explainability algorithm for E2AlertNet which is elaborated in the section 3.2.
3.1. Network architecture

In aerial image classification, there are multiple ways i.e. transfer learning to use the existing designed CNN architectures. Still,
most of these are challenging to deploy in real time due to a large number of parameters and high memory requirements, which in-
crease computation cost and deployment costs. Hence the primary instinct behind designing the proposed architecture that should
solve these existing limitations and build trust in the results with the XAI algorithm. The proposed architecture learns multi-resolution
contextual features from the aerial training images with minimum number of parameters with achieving accuracy compare to large
existing network.

Table 1
Comparison study between LIME and SHAP.
LIME SHAP
Local Interpretable Model Agnostic Explanations Shapley Additive Explanations
Find the explanations by approximating the local linear behaviour of model Find the global explanations based on game theory
Works for both structured and unstructured data (images) Works for both structured and unstructured data (images)
It advantageous in terms of computation time Due to Additive property, it can extendas model ensemble methods

3



N. Saini et al. Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

Based on these features learning, the model classifies input images and visualizes them using model agnostic methods to ensure
explainability. Fig. 2 depicts a high-level overview of the proposed network known as E2AlertNet which is contained three modules
under the feature learning: CBL i.e. convolution block that map images into feature space, WDB_1 weighted dilation block which ef-
fectively incorporate larger context of the model by increasing the receptive field with minimum parameters and WDB_2 is WDB_1
with average pooling layer and followed by global avg pooling, softmax for the classification. The dilated convolutional features at
different dilation rates are combined together with weighted average fusion scheme to allow effective learning of representations
from a large receptive field which can be defined by following equation:

( ) ∑
F∗d k (p) = wd F (s) ⋅ k (t) (1)

s+dt=p

where F,d,k represent receptive field, dilation rate and convolution kernel respectively. The term ∗d used for dilated convolution and
wd is the weight of the layer at dilation rate d. The weighted dilation convolution operation allow to learn the features at different res-
olution with different dilation rate so that variation of resolution do not affect the model training. The proposed dilated convolution
network parameters are summarized in Table 2. As we divided the network into blocks such as convolution block(CBL) and weighted
dilation block (WDB) where each convolution layer is followed by batch normalization and leaky ReLu activation function. The train-
ing data included the various sizes of the input image, hence we resized the image into 224 × 224 × 3. And the most important layer
of the architecture is output layer which has a softmax activation to ensure the all predicted classification results sum is 1.
3.2. Proposed E2AlertNet explainability algorithm

The deep learning architecture is complex to interpret directly; hence, we have used model-agnostic methods such as SHAP and
LIME, which can be used for any deep learning model. With the LIME, a local surrogate model is trained to explain the individual pre-
dictions of black-box models. It generates the new dataset by applying random perturbation along with predictions of the model.
Specifically, for the images, it does not change the pixels of the image randomly whether it segments the image into superpixels which
is the collections of pixels of the image that cover a region of interest (RoI). After that, it trained the model with this dataset by apply-
ing variations and explaining the prediction of the local model. Mathematically, LIME can be expressed as follows:

E(x) = g ∈ G L(f, g, πx) + Ω(g) (2)
where E is the explanation of image input x for model g which minimizes the loss L such that the explanation is close to prediction of
the original model f while keeping the Ω(g) model complexity lower and πx is the area of neighbourhood of x for explanations. LIME
focuses on the local interpretation of the model's prediction.

Fig. 2. Illustration of the proposed E2AlertNet which mainly contains three modules
(i) CBL made by conv, batch normalization and leaky ReLu activation (ii) WDB 1 is weighted dilation block, contains dilation convolution, batch normalization, leaky
ReLu
(iii) WDB 2 weighted dilation block along with average pooling layer.

4



N. Saini et al. Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

Table 2
E2AlertNet architecture: this table shows the type of layer, filter size, stride size, padding size, output size, number of filters and the number of parameters in each
layer.
Operation Group Operation Layer Name Filter Size Stride Size Padding Size Output Size No. of Filters Param
– Input Image input layer n/a n/a n/a 224x224x3 n/a 0
CBL conv1 convolution layer 3x3 2x2 1x1 110x110x32 32 2400

batch normalization n/a n/a n/a 110x110x32 n/a 128
leaky ReLu layer n/a n/a n/a 110x110x32 n/a 0

WDB dilated conv (3 times) convolution layer 3x3 1x1 1x1 110x110x16 64 144
batch normalization n/a n/a n/a 110x110x16 n/a 64
leaky ReLu layer n/a n/a n/a 110x110x16 n/a 0

Pooling average pooling layer 3x3 1x1 0 55x55x64 1 0
WDB dilated conv (3 times) convolution layer 3x3 1x1 1x1 55x55x32 96 288

batch normalization n/a n/a n/a 55x55x32 n/a 128
leaky ReLu layer n/a n/a n/a 55x55x32 n/a 0

Pooling average pooling layer 3x3 1x1 0 27x27x96 1 0
WDB dilated conv (3 times) convolution layer 3x3 1x1 1x1 27x27x48 128 432

batch normalization n/a n/a n/a 27x27x48 n/a 192
leaky ReLu layer n/a n/a n/a 27x27x48 n/a 0

Pooling average pooling layer 3x3 1x1 0 13x13x128 1 0
WDB dilated conv (3 times) convolution layer 3x3 1x1 1x1 13x13x64 128 576

batch normalization n/a n/a n/a 13x13x64 n/a 256
leaky ReLu layer n/a n/a n/a 13x13x64 n/a 0

WDB dilated conv (3 times) convolution layer 3x3 1x1 1x1 13x13x64 128 576
batch normalization n/a n/a n/a 13x13x64 n/a 256
leaky ReLu layer n/a n/a n/a 13x13x64 n/a 0

WDB dilated conv (3 times) convolution layer 3x3 1x1 1x1 13x13x64 128 576
batch normalization n/a n/a n/a 13x13x64 n/a 256
leaky ReLu layer n/a n/a n/a 13x13x64 n/a 0

– sepera conv convolution layer 1x1 1x1 1x1 13x13x5 3 1536
batch normalization n/a n/a n/a 13x13x5 n/a 20
leaky ReLu layer n/a n/a n/a 13x13x5 n/a 0

– global pooling avg pooling layer – – – 5 – –
– Output output layer – – – 5 – –

SHAP method explains the model's prediction on given input x using game theory. It calculates the Shapley values for each feature
that contribute to the prediction. SHAP employs the additive feature contribution method in which the output of the model is repre-
sented as a linear addition of input parameters to construct the model explainable as defined in the following equation:

∑N

f (x) = 𝜙0 + 𝜙ixi (3)
i=1

where the model f is the explanation model on the given input x, xi is simpli-fied feature vector of x, N is the maximum feature size
and φi ∈ R is feature attribution for a feature i. For the input as image, SHAP values calculated mainly on the global level of super pix-
els. Hence for enhancing the level of explanation, we have proposed the new algorithm based on the aggregation of super-pixels at
both level of explanations local and global. To do this process, the algorithm 1 is outlined in which the explanations of LIME and
SHAP are ensembled to better visualization at local and global level.

In the machine learning models, ensemble learning uses to improve prediction accuracy and reducing variance such a way that
model will unlikely to overfit. Hence for enhancing the level of explanation, in our case, we have proposed a ensembled approach (see
Alg. 1) that aggregates super-pixels at local and global level of explanations and provides improved visualization at local and global
level. In the Alg. 1, initially LIME and SHAP feature explanations extracted, after that we have considered ensemble averaging
method. Through ensemble explanations, the E2AlertNet explainability algorithm compresses redundant explanations properties from
both level into a single summary metric. Along with this, this enhance the “stability”, a desirable property for an explainable model
which is defined as providing the similar explanation for similar type of inputs whereas individual LIME algorithm has limitation of
lacking stability and mislead the explanations.

4. Experiments and results
To validate the performance of the E2AlertNet, we have used a dedictaed dataset for monitoring emergency through aerial images

which is discuss in section 4.1. The qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the proposed architecture and algorithm have discussed
in section 4.3 and 4.4 respectively.
Algorithm 1. Pseudo Code for E2AlertNet explainability algorithm

5



N. Saini et al. Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

4.1. Dataset description
We evaluated our proposed method with the publicly available dataset to dedicate the emergency response applications referred

to as AIDER (Aerial Image Dataset for Emergency Response Applications). The dataset involves 8540 large aerial images with differ-
ent resolutions including 5 classes in which four classes for the disaster events, namely Collapsed Building, Fire, Flooded Areas, and
Traffic Incident, and the fifth class for the Normal case.
4.2. Implementation details

We implemented aerial image classification experiments using Keras deep learning framework with Tensorflow as backend. As a
data prepossessing, we resized the image into 224 × 224 × 3 and performed some augmentations such as rotation, horizontal flip,
blurring, etc., to increase the dataset. To start the training process, the dataset of images split into the ratio 0.6, 0.2, 0.2 respectively
for training, validation, and testing. The dataset summary with each class is shown in the Table 3 which describes the number of im-
ages for each class belong to train, validation and test set of dataset. In the dataset, normal class images are over represented, leading
to overfitting of the network. We have under sampled the normal class by oversampling the other minority classes in the batch to
avoid this imbalance. All experiments were performed on a computer with the NVIDIA GeForce RTX 1080 GPU and 8 GB of memory.
The proposed model trained with Adam optimizer with cosine learning rate annealing schedule. We run the model for 300 epochs
with initial learning rate 0.2 and 32 batch size. For the explanation of outcomes using our proposed algorithm, we have considered
max evals as 1000 with batch size of 50.
4.3. Quantitative evaluation

To evaluate image classification statistically, well-known standard measures are used: overall accuracy(OA), precision, recall, and
F1 score. Overall accuracy is the measure to identify the percentage of correct prediction. Precision tells the exactness of the model,
whereas recall tells about the com-pleteness of the model. Table 4 contains the individual classification results for the five categories
in the dataset, which allows drawing some conclusions such as low precision of collapsed building images due to not occupying the
large area of the image, i.e., more information of the image match into the normal class. We also trained some standard architectures
such as VGG16, ResNet50 and MobileNet wih same settings to get the effectiveness of the ours model. The comparison results for all

Table 3
Summary of AIDER dataset.
AIDER Dataset Collapsed Building Fire Flooded Areas Traffic Incident Normal Total per split
Train 420 444 420 420 3420 5124
Val 140 148 140 140 1140 1708
Test 140 148 140 140 1140 1708
Total per class 700 740 700 700 5700 Overall:8540

Table 4
Quantitative results attained by the model.
Class Label Precision Recall F1 score OA
Collapsed Building 0.63 1.00 0.77
Fire 1.00 1.00 1.00
Flooded Areas 0.69 1.00 0.82 96.00
Traffic Incident 1.00 0.95 0.98
Normal 0.94 0.89 0.92

6



N. Saini et al. Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

Table 5
Statistics comparison with existing approaches.
Model Overall Accuracy Memory (MB) Parameters
VGG16 91.9 59.3 14,849,349
ResNet50 90.2 96.4 24,113,541
Xception 95.3 85.55 21,387,309
MobileNet V1 95 13.9 3,492,549
MobileNet V2 95.2 10.3 2,587,205
MobileNet V3 95.3 12.1 3,046,037
SqueezeNet 91.5 2.7 698,917
ShuffleNet 91.1 17.1 4,282,425
FireNet 90.5 5.2 5,235,860
E2AlertNet(Ours) 96.0 0.368 94,420

Fig. 3. Comparison of correct classification with XAI algorithms where in our explanation, the red box shows the additional features which are learned by our proposed
model

the networks are summarized in Table 5. The proposed model achieves the 96% accuracy with fewer parameters than other most
competitive architectures.
4.4. Qualitative evaluation

Explanation of the model's predictions is another essential criterion for the end-user to build trust in the model's results. As in our
emergency monitoring case, to show our method's effectiveness in interpreting correctly classified and incorrectly classified images,
we have applied model agnostic methods SHAP, LIME and our proposed explanation algorithm. Those visualization results have
shown in the Fig. 3 where in the SHAP-based analysis the highlighted pixels show the fair distribution of the model's prediction
among features to classify. In comparison, LIME has generated super-pixels feature regions to interpret the model's prediction. Our
proposed explanation algorithm have aggregated the global and local level features to explain the outcomes more effectively. How-
ever, we have also added some failure cases in the Fig. 4 to explain the miss-classified results. By observing the highlighted pixels by
our algorithm in the Fig. 4, we can understand why the model misclassifies “normal” and “traffic incident” as “flooded areas”. In the

7



N. Saini et al. Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

Fig. 4. Miss-classified results with explanations and the red box in our explanation shows the additional features which are learned by our proposed model

case of “normal” class misclassification,the model has found road as something similar to the flood water. Hence explainability pro-
vides one additional measure to justify the model's prediction as human-understandable.

5. Discussion
In the results of the experiments, our methodology classified the four emergency cases and one normal class with an overall accu-

racy 96.0% and a total number of parameters 94, 420. It indicated that our E2AlertNet architecture can categorize all the classes, such
as fire, flooded, etc., with high accuracy and fewer parameters compared to other standard deep learning architectures. The proposed
methodology's potentiality does not rely on the accuracy parameter. We have also explored the E2AlertNet ability by proposing the
XAI algorithm, which builds more trust into the output results of the model by explanation. We have studied both the cases, i.e., cor-
rect classification and not correct classification by the model. However, when considering the correct classification result in each
class, our proposed E2AlertNet explainability algorithm has highlighted those regions which play a vital role in classifying the input
image into the correct output class. This algorithm also has the advantage of understanding misclassification results like the model
has misclassified the traffic incident image by flooded areas due to more extraction of road features which created confusion between
road and water features. We have concluded this reason with the help of an explainability algorithm that helps explain the black box
model in a human-understandable form. The proposed explainable algorithm will also give an insight view of designing the solution
to these issues by improving the existing methodology.

6. Conclusion and future scope
This paper has proposed a multi-resolution deep neural network named a weighted dilated convolution network to provide emer-

gency monitoring through aerial imagery. The E2AlertNet has been evaluated with two criteria: statistics, i.e., accuracy, precision, re-
call, F1 score, and visualization through our proposed explanation algorithm. The experimental results demonstrated that E2AlertNet
had achieved 96% accuracy with minimum memory requirements, and our explainable AI algorithm has provided a greater trust in
model predictions results for emergency monitoring. The proposed network used minimum parameters with high accuracy, which
provide a future scope to deploy the model using UAV applications for real-time data.

In addition, the proposed network is limited to a single label, a multi-class classification that can expand to multi-label, multi-class
classification by adding and improving the dataset. Quantitative analysis of explainability models have been explored in textual do-
main, as part of the future work, we are also planning to explore the quantitative analysis of the explainability results for aerial im-
ages.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to

influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability
The dataset is publicly available.

8



N. Saini et al. Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 29 (2023) 100896

References
Akshya, J., Priyadarsini, P., 2019. A hybrid machine learning approach for classify- ing aerial images of flood-hit areas. In: 2019 International Conference on

Computational Intelligence in Data Science (ICCIDS). pp. 1–5.
Al-Kaff, A., Martin, D., Garcia, F., de la Escalera, A., Armingol, J.M., 2018. Survey of computer vision algorithms and applications for unmanned aerial vehicles. Expert

Syst. Appl. 92, 447–463.
Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.-R., Samek, W., 2015. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance

propagation. PLoS One 10, e0130140.
Bejiga, M.B., Zeggada, A., Nouffidj, A., Melgani, F., 2017. A convolutional neural network approach for assisting avalanche search and rescue operations with uav

imagery. Rem. Sens. 9, 100.
Castellano, G., Castiello, C., Mencar, C., Vessio, G., 2020. In: Crowd Counting from Unmanned Aerial Vehicles with Fully-Convolutional Neural Networks. IJCNN, pp.

1–8.
Chen, S., 2021. Interpretation of Multi-Label Classification Models Using Shapley Values, arXiv Preprint arXiv:2104. 10505.
Dang-Ngoc, H., Nguyen-Trung, H., 2019. Aerial forest fire surveillance - evaluation of forest fire detection model using aerial videos. In: 2019 International Conference

on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC). pp. 142–148.
Demir, I., Koperski, K., Lindenbaum, D., Pang, G., Huang, J., Basu, S., Hughes, F., Tuia, D., Raskar, R., Deepglobe, 2018. A challenge to parse the earth through satellite

images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Confer- Ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. pp. 172–181.
Fadaeddini, A., Eshghi, M., Majidi, B., 2018. A deep residual neural network for low altitude remote sensing image classification. In: 2018 6th Iranian Joint Congress on

Fuzzy and Intelligent Systems (CFIS). pp. 43–46.
Gebrehiwot, A., Hashemi-Beni, L., Thompson, G., Kordjamshidi, P., Langan, T.E., 2019. Deep convolutional neural network for flood extent mapping using unmanned

aerial vehicles data. Sensors 19, 1486.
Gharaee, Z., Kowshik, S., Stromann, O., Felsberg, M., 2021. Graph representa- tion learning for road type classification. Pattern Recogn. 120, 108174.
Kyrkou, C., Theocharides, T., 2019. In: Deep-learning-based Aerial Image Classification for Emergency Response Applications Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.

CVPRW.
Kyrkou, C., Theocharides, T., 2020. Emergencynet: efficient aerial image classifi- cation for drone-based emergency monitoring using atrous convolutional feature

fusion. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Rem. Sens. 13, 1687–1699.
Kyrkou, C., Timotheou, S., Kolios, P., Theocharides, T., Panayiotou, C.G., 2018. Optimized vision-directed deployment of uavs for rapid traffic monitoring. In: 2018

IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE). IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Maggiori, E., Tarabalka, Y., Charpiat, G., Alliez, P., 2016. Convolutional neural networks for large-scale remote-sensing image classification. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Rem.

Sens. 55, 645–657.
Martins, V.S., Kaleita, A.L., Gelder, B.K., da Silveira, H.L., Abe, C.A., 2020. Ex- ploring multiscale object-based convolutional neural network (multi-ocnn) for remote

sensing image classification at high spatial resolution. ISPRS J. Photogrammetry Remote Sens. 168, 56–73.
Mishra, B., Garg, D., Narang, P., Mishra, V., 2020. Drone-surveillance for search and rescue in natural disaster. Comput. Commun. 156, 1–10.
Nogueira, K., Penatti, O.A., dos Santos, J.A., 2017. Towards better exploiting con- volutional neural networks for remote sensing scene classification. Pattern Recogn.

61, 539–556.
Rahnemoonfar, M., Chowdhury, T., Sarkar, A., Varshney, D., Yari, M., Murphy, R.R., 2021. Floodnet: a high resolution aerial imagery dataset for post flood scene

understanding. IEEE Access 9, 89644–89654.
Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C., 2016. Why should i trust you?” explaining the predictions of any classifier. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International

Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 1135–1144.
Samek, W., Montavon, G., Vedaldi, A., Hansen, L.K., Müller, K.-R., 2019. In: Explain- Able AI: Interpreting, Explaining and Visualizing Deep Learning, vol. 11700.

Springer Nature.
Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., Batra, D., 2017. Grad-cam: visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In:

Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Com- Puter Vision. pp. 618–626.
Shamsoshoara, A., Afghah, F., Razi, A., Zheng, L., Fulé, P.Z., Blasch, E., 2021. Aerial imagery pile burn detection using deep learning: the flame dataset. Com- puter

Networks 193, 108001.
Van Etten, A., Lindenbaum, D., Bacastow, T.M., 2018. Spacenet: A Remote Sensing Dataset and Challenge Series, arXiv Preprint arXiv:1807.01232.
Zheng, H., Gong, M., Liu, T., Jiang, F., Zhan, T., Lu, D., Zhang, M., 2022. Hfa-net: high frequency attention siamese network for building change detection in vhr remote

sensing images. Pattern Recogn. 108717.

9
